=== The Soil Biology Primer - Elaine Ingham.pdf ===
Metodo: digitale_fitz | Pagine: 58 | Chars totali: 103,847 | Data: 2026-06-30
Chunks: 3

INDICE CHUNKS:
  chunk_001: 45,000 chars — [PAG 1] Historic, Archive Document Do not assume content reflects current scientific l<nowledge, policies, or practices.  [PAG 3] 0NRCS Soil Biology C United States Department of Agriculture Natural R...
  chunk_002: 44,994 chars — mpose a wide array of substrates, but are espe- cially important in degrading recal- citrant (hard-to-decompose) compounds, such as chitin and cel- lulose, and are active at high pH levels. Fungi are ...
  chunk_003: 13,853 chars — [PAG 49] USDA NRCS United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service Soil Quality Institute Soil Biology Primer EarthWOmiS Figure 2: Corn leaf pulled into a night crawler ...

TESTO COMPLETO CHUNK 1 (prime pagine):
[PAG 1]
Historic, Archive Document
Do not assume content reflects current
scientific l<nowledge, policies, or practices.

[PAG 3]
0NRCS
Soil Biology
C
United States Department of Agriculture
Natural Resources Conservation Service
PA-1637

[PAG 4]
Letter from the Chief
I am proud to introduce the Soil Biology Primer. The Soil Biology Primer
represents a new era in our agency's soil science contributions to natural
=
resource conservation.
In the past we have focused primarily on the chemical
and physical properties of soil. This publication highlights another integral
component of soil, its biological features. The Primer explains the importance
of biological functions for productive and healthy agricultural systems, range-
lands, and forest lands.
The Soil Biology Primer is intended for farmers, ranchers, agricultural profes-
sionals, resource specialists, students, teachers, and NRCS conservationists,
specialists, and soil scientists as a reference for enhanced understanding of the
critical functions performed by soil life.
I hope you enjoy reading about the
fascinating diversity of soil life under our feet and gain a deeper appreciation
of the intrinsic value of soil organisms to sustainable civilizations.
Protecting
our Nation's soil for future generations is of greatest importance.
Pearlie S. Reed
Chief
Natural Resources Conservation Service
SOIL SURVEY
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all
its programs and activities on the
basis of race, color, national origin, gender, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, or
marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.)
Persons with disabilities who require
alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should
contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten
Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice and
TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.

[PAG 5]
Soil Biology
Primer
The Soil Biology Primer is an introduction to the living component of soil and how it
contributes to agricultural productivity, and air and water quality. The Primer includes
units describing the soil food web and how the food web relates to soil health, and units
about bacteria, fungi, protozoa, nematodes, arthropods, and earthworms. To obtain a
copy, contact your local office of the Natural Resources Conservation Service. They are
listed in the phone book under Federal Government in the Agriculture Department
under Natural Resources.
Contents
The Soil FoodWeb
A-1
The FoodWeb & Soil Health
B-1
Soil Bacteria
C-1
Soil Fungi
D-1
Soil Protozoa
E-1
Soil Nematodes
F-1
Soil Arthropods
G-1
Earthworms
H-1
For information about the Soil Quality Institute, visit our web site at
http://www.statlab.iastate.edu/sur