=== CATEGORIA: esoterismo | Tertium_Organum_P_D_Ouspensky.txt ===

INDICE CHUNKS:
  chunk_001: 45,000 chars — [PAG 1] TERTIUM ORGANUM   THE THIRD CANON OF THOUGHT  A KEY TO THE ENIGMAS OF THE WORLD  [PAG 2] And sware . . . that there should be time no longer.  Revelation 10: 6  That ye, being rooted and groun...
  chunk_002: 43,673 chars — nton has two separate books The Fourth Dimension and A New Era of Thought;  there are also three books of popular articles and fiction, Scientific Romances, where  he expounds the same ideas.  [PAG 24...
  chunk_003: 45,000 chars — [PAG 42] actions and accidental new combinations of causes. The future is considered  either as completely undetermined or only partially determined, because at  each moment new forces, new events, ne...
  chunk_004: 44,849 chars — es - vital  energy, or even soul. This something will be regarded as unknowable for a  two-dimensional being, since it is the result of an incomprehensible motion of  incomprehensible bodies.  If we i...
  chunk_005: 45,000 chars — [PAG 78] world around us changed with these alterations, this would prove to us the  dependence of the properties of space on the properties of our mind.  For instance, if the above-mentioned higher f...
  chunk_006: 43,032 chars — movement of the moon  among the clouds and so on.  In addition, many other movements will exist for animals which we do not  suspect. Actually a great many objects, completely motionless for us - inde...
  chunk_007: 43,372 chars — [PAG 112] representatives, SCIENCE, in the last decades has, after all, touched upon  problems of higher dimensions, and in such cases arrived at results almost  identical with those expounded in the ...
  chunk_008: 45,000 chars — [PAG 128] CHAPTER 13  The apparent and the hidden side of life. Positivism as the study of the phenomenal  aspect of life. What constitutes the 'two-dimensionality' of positivist philosophy?  Envisagi...
  chunk_009: 45,000 chars — rs. Benjamin Jowett, book VII, Oxford, 1908.  [PAG 146] Behold' human beings living in an underground den, which has a mouth open  towards the light and reaching all along the den, here they have been...
  chunk_010: 44,045 chars — stortion, or even a complete disappearance of  mental faculties, manifesting in our sphere. The idea of comparing three-dimensional and four-dimensional bodies  enables us to assert that not all activ...
  chunk_011: 45,000 chars — [PAG 181] coherence and unity, such as a philosophical school, a church, a sect, a  masonic order, a society, a party, etc., is undoubtedly a living being,  possessing a certain intelligence. A people...
  chunk_012: 43,140 chars — cubes], we first  of all learn it by starting from a particular cube, and learning how all the others come  with regard to that. We learn the block with regard to this axis, so that we can  mentally c...
  chunk_013: 44,127 chars — [PAG 215] psychology and a theory of knowledge, based precisely on the idea of expansion of  perception.  External objects present us only with appearances. Concerning them, therefore, we  may be said...
  chunk_014: 43,421 chars — [PAG 233] into philosophical systems - but in some strange way it was not recognized as LOGIC.  The system of this logic can be deduced from a great many philosophical systems. I  find the most exact ...
  chunk_015: 45,000 chars — [PAG 249] great. The sun too which is there is all the stars: and again each star is the sun and  all the stars. In each, however, a different property predominates, but at the same  time all things a...
  chunk_016: 43,181 chars — id a premature closing of  our account with reality. . . .  The whole drift of my education goes to persuade me that the world of our present  consciousness is only one of many worlds of consciousness...
  chunk_017: 43,277 chars — [PAG 280] the miserable sense whereof replaced man's former feeling of innocence. That then,  and not till then, man began to labour and to cover his body. Stranger than all, the  story runs, that alo...
  chunk_018: 18,349 chars — [PAG 295] Table of the four forms of the manifestation of consciousness - contd.  First form  Second form  Third form  Fourth form  Kinds of Reflex.  actions Unconscious  responsive  action to  extern...

TESTO COMPLETO CHUNK 1 (prime pagine):
[PAG 1]
TERTIUM ORGANUM  
THE THIRD CANON OF THOUGHT 
A KEY TO THE ENIGMAS OF THE WORLD

[PAG 2]
And sware . . . that there should be time no longer. 
Revelation 10: 6 
That ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all  
saints what is the breadth, the length, the depth and the height. 
St Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians 3: 17, 18

[PAG 3]
CONTENTS  
CHAPTER 1 
What do we know and what do we not know? Our known data 
and our unknown data. Unknown quantities taken as known 
quantities. Matter and motion. What does positivist philosophy
arrive at? Identity of the unknown quantities: x = y, y = x. 
What do we actually know? The existence of consciousness in 
us and of the world outside us. Dualism or monism? 
Subjective and objective cognition. Where do the causes of 
sensations lie? Kant's system. Time and space. Mach's 
observation. What the physicist actually works with. 
CHAPTER 2 
A new view of Kant's problem. Hinton's books. 'Space-sense' 
and its evolution. A system for developing the sense of the 
fourth dimension by means of exercises with different 
coloured cubes. The geometrical concept of space. Three 
perpendiculars. Why are there only three? Can everything 
existing be measured by three perpendiculars? Physical and 
metaphysical facts. Signs of existence. The reality of ideas. 
The insufficient evidence of the existence of matter and 
motion. Matter and motion are only logical concepts, like 
'good' and 'evil'. 
CHAPTER 3 
What can we learn about the fourth dimension by studying 
geometrical relationships within our space? What should be 
the relationship of a three-dimensional body to a four­
dimensional one? A four-dimensional body as the trace of the 
movement of a three-dimensional body in a direction not 
contained in it. A four-dimensional body as composed of an 
infinite

[PAG 4]
number of three-dimensional bodies. A three-dimensional 
body as a section of a four-dimensional one. Parts of bodies 
and whole bodies in three and in four dimensions. 
Incommensurability of a three-dimensional and a four­
dimensional body. A material atom as a section of a four­
dimensional line. 
CHAPTER 4 
In what direction may the fourth dimension lie? What is 
motion? Two kinds of movement - movement in space and 
movement in time - contained in every motion. What is time? 
Present past and future. Wundt on sense-cognition. Groping 
through life. Why we do not see the past and the future. A new 
extension in space and motion in that space. Two ideas 
contained in the concept of time. Time as the fourth dimension 
of space. Impossibility of understanding the idea of the fourth 
dimension without the idea of motion. The idea of motion and 
'time-sense'. 'Time-sense' as the limit (surface) of space sense. 
Riemann's idea of the translation of time into space in the 
fourth dimension. Hinton on the law of surfaces. 'Ether' as a 
surface. 
CHAPTER 5 
Four-dimensional space. 'Time-body' - Linga Sharira. Form of 
the human b