=== An Agricultural Testament - Albert Howard.pdf — CHUNK 12/14 ===
Chars: 44,646 | Offset: 491,143



How do the summer and autumn crops, often raised in this area
under extensive methods, manage to obtain a supply of nitrate
without any added manure, and how is it that the soil fertility of
the Gangetic alluvium remains so constant? To begin to answer
these questions, soil borings from a typical unmanured area—
fallowed after the wheat crop which was removed in April—were
systematically examined and the nitric nitrogen estimated directly
by Schloesing’s method.

The results, aswell as the details of temperature and rainfall, are
given in Plate VII. The curve brings out clearly: (1) the large
and rapid formation of nitrate as the temperature rises in February
and March, just at the time when the young sugar-cane plant
takes in its supply of nitrogen, (2) the almost complete disappear-
ance of nitrates from the soil after the first falls of heavy rain—
these are partly washed out and partly immobilized by fungous
growth, provided the humus content of the soil has been main-
tained, (3) the absence of nitrification in the saturated soil during
the monsoon, (4) another accumulation of nitrate (less rapid and
less in quantity than in the spring) which occurs in the autumn,

P

[PAG 239]
210 AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH

following the drying of the soil at the end of the rains, combined
with improved aeration, the result of frequent surface cultivation.
Five ploughings to a depth of 3 inches, followed by the levelling
beam, were given between September 25th and November goth.
These accumulations, obviously the result of biological processes,
fit in with the quantitative requirements of the summer and
autumn crops, which need immediate supplies of nitrogen as soon
as the seed germinates. .

When we compare these results on nitrate accumulation with
what the Indian cultivator is doing, we are lost in admiration of
the way he sets about his task. With no help from science, and by
observation alone, he has in the course of ages adjusted his
methods of agriculture to the conservation of soil fertility in a
most remarkable manner. He is by no means the ignorant and
backward villager he is sometimes represented to be, but among
the most economical farmers in the world as far as the manage-
ment of the potent element of fertility—combined nitrogen—goes,
and tropical agriculture all over the world has much to learn from’
him. The sugar grower of the great plains of India cannot take
a heavy overdraft of nitrogen from his soil. He has only a limited
store—the small current account provided by non-symbiotic
nitrogen fixation and the capital stock of humus needed to main-
tain the crumb structure and the general life of the soil. He must
make the most of his current account; he dare not utilize any of
his capital. He has in the course of ages instinctively devised .
methods of management which fulfil these conditions. He does
not over-cultivate or cultivate at the wrong time. Nothing is done
to over-oxidize his precious floating nitrogen or to destroy his
capital of humus. He probably does more with a little nitrogen
than any farmer in the world outside China. For countless ages
he has been able to maintain the present standard of fertility.

If the production of sugar was to be raised, obviously the first
step was to provide more nitrate for the critical growth period of
May and June, when the tillers and root system are developing.
The conventional method would be to stimulate the crop by the
addition of factory-made and imported fertilizers such as sulphate
of ammonia. There are weighty objections to such a course. The
cultivator could not afford them; the supply might be cut off in

[PAG 240]
A SUCCESSFUL EXAMPLE OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 21I

time of war; the effect of adding these substances to the soil would
be to upset the balance of soil fertility—the foundation of the
Indian Empire—by setting in motion oxidation processes which
would eat into India’s capital, and burn up the vital store of soil
humus. Increased crops would indeed be obtained for a few years,
but at what a cost—lowered soil fertility, lowered production,
inferior quality, diseases of crops, of animals, and of the population,
and finally diseases of the soil itself, such as soil erosion and a
desert of alkali land! To place in the hands of the cultivator such
a means of temporarily increasing his crops would be more than a
mere error of judgement: it would be a crime. The use of arti-
ficials being ruled out altogether, some alternative source of
nitrogen had to be found.

Any intensive method of sugar growing in the United Provinces
must accomplish two things: (1) the normal accumulations of
nitrates in the soil at the beginning of the rains must be fully
utilized, and (2) the content of soil organic matter must be raised
and the biological processes speeded up so that these natural
accumulations can be increased. |

The problem of making use of the nitrate naturally formed in
order to raise the content of organic matter was solved in a very
neat fashion—by a new method of grecn-manuring. The fallow,
which ordinarily precedes cane, was used to grow a crop of san
hemp with the help of about 4 tons of farm-yard manure to the
acre. This small dressing of cattle manure had a remarkable
effect on the speed of growth and also on the way the green crop
decayed when it was ploughed in. Yiclds of 8 tons of green-manure
were produced in about 60 days which added nearly 2 tons of
organic matter, or 75 Ib. of nitrogen, to cach acre. In this way
the nitrates accumulated at the break of the rains were absorbed
and immobilized; a large mass of crude organic matcrial was
provided by the green manure itself and by the small dressing
of farm-yard manure applied before sowing. Sheet composting
took place in the surface soil.

The early stages of decomposition need ample moisture. The
rainfall after the green crop was ploughed in was carefully
watched. If it was less than 5 inches in the first fortnight in
September, the fields were irrigated. In this way an abundant

[PAG 241]
212 , AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH

fungous growth was secured on the’ green-manure as the land
slowly dried. The conversion of the whole of the green crop into
humus was not complete until the end of November. Nitrification
then began, slowly, owing to the low temperatures of the cold:
weather in North India and at a season when there is little risk
of loss. It was not until the newly planted canes were watered

at the end of February and the temperature rose at the beginning
of the hot weather that all the available nitrogen in the freshly
prepared humus was rapidly nitrified to meet the growing needs
of the developing root system of the cane. This means simply
that a definite time is required for the formation of humus, whether
it takes place in the soil by sheet composting or in the compost
heap, a longer period being required in the soil than in the heap.
The gradual filling of the trenches and the watering of the canes
during the hot weather continued the nitrification process, which
was carried a stage farther by the earthing up of the canes. The
provision of drainage trenches between the rows reduced to a
minimum any losses of nitrogen due to poor soil aeration follow-
ing the formation of soil colloids. The canes were thus provided
with ample nitrate throughout the growth period. The conditions
necessary for the mycorrhizal association were also established.

The effects of green-manuring on the nitrate supply is shown in
Plate VIII. It will be seen that the enrichment of the soil with
humus has markedly increased the amount of nitrate formed
during the crucial period (March to June) when the rapidly
growing cane absorbs most of its supplies.

The yields of cane and ofraw sugar of twenty-seven randomized
plots in the green-manured and control plots are given below:

TABLE II
Effect of green manuring on sugar-cane

- Sugar-cane maunds' Raw sugar maunds, | Dry matter maunds,

(823 /b.), per acre | per acre : per acre
Green-manure . . 8B47:01+32-0 di 870136 i 246-048-0
Control. ole «| 6agrotaz:o |, 672426 | 2001466

These control plots are representative of the fertile plots of the
Shahjahanpur Experiment Station, not of the fields of the
_ cultivators.

[PAG 242]
PLATE VIII

1929
MAR APR MAY JUNE JUY AUG. SEP

RAINFALL & IRRIGATION IN INCHES.

REFERENCE
TREATED Ge ee

UNTREATED
‘| pauerace

=
(ARICATION. è + ED

‘
ti
I

MAR APR MAY JUNE JULY AUG SER OCT. MAR, APR. MAY JUNE JULY AUG SER

NITRATE ACCUMULATION, GREEN-MANURE EXPERIMENT, SHAHJAHANPUR,
1928-9

[PAG 244]
i A SUCCESSFUL EXAMPLE OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 213

The crop in the field is shown in Plate TX. The practical result
of this simple method of intensive cane-growing worked out at a
profit of £6 an acre. These satisfactory results were reflected in
the annual statement of income and expenditure of the Shah-
jahanpur Experiment Station. For many years income exceeded
expenditure by about 50 per cent.

The question therefore of the practical value of the work done
at this Station needed no argument. It was obvious. By the help
of: green-manure alone, supplemented by a small dressing of ©
cattle dung, the yield of cane was raised from 13 to over 30 tons to
the acre; the yield of sugar from 1 ton to over 3 tons:

The effect ‘of the intensive cultivation of sugar-cane is not
confined to that crop. The residual fertility and the deep cultiva-
tion of the trenches enabled bumper crops of Pusa wheat and gram
—the two rotation crops grown with cane at Shahjahanpur—to
be obtained. These were more than three times the average yields
obtained by the cultivators. In one case in a field of 3} acres,
Pusa 12 wheat gave 35 maunds to the acre with one irrigation ‘of
4 inches in November. The preceding cane crop was Ashy
Mauritius, which yielded 34-7 tons to-the acre.

* In the early days of the Shahjahanpur farm the effect of the _
cane trenches on the following wheat crop was very pronounced.
The surface of the wheat fields resernbled a sheet of corrugated:
iron, the ridges corresponding to the trenches. After a few sugar ‘
crops this condition passed off, and the wheat appeared uniform;
all the land had been raised to the new level of fertility.

Tt is now possible to record the various stages passed through in
this study of intensive sugar production:

I. The unimproved crop in an average year yielded 350 maunds

per acre (1 maund = 82% Ib.; 27-2 maunds = 1 ton).

2. The best indigenous varieties, grown at their maximum
capacity with slightly decper ploughing than the cultivator
gives and a small quantity of manure, gave 450 maunds
per acre, ,

3. The introduction of new varieties like POJ 213 and Co 213,
grown on the flat with the same cultivation as (2) above,

. gave 600 maunds per acre, The increment due to variety
was therefore 150 maunds per acre (600—450).

[PAG 245]
214 AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH

4. The use of new varieties plus green-manure on the flat
without trenches yielded 800-maunds per acre. The incre-
ment due to green-manure was therefore 200 maunds per
acre (800-600).

5. Intensive cultivation in trenches, with green-manure plus
the manuring of the trenches with castor cake meal at the
rate of 1,640 lb. per acre, yielded 1,000 maunds per acre,
The increment due to improved soil aeration and an adequate
supply of humus in the trenches was therefore 200 maunds
per acre (1,000—800).

6. The very highest yield ever obtained at Shahjahanpur by
the use of (5) above was 1,200 maunds per atre. The
additional increment; when all the factors were functioning
at or near their optima was 200 maunds per acre (1,200—

1,000).

It will be seen that a combination of variety, green manuring,
and correct soil management, including the manuring of the
treriches, added 650 maunds per acre (1,000—350) and that in-
creases of 850 maunds per acre are possible (1,200—350). In the
intensive trench method the plant attains an exceptionally high
efficiency in the synthesis of carbohydrates. In an out-turn test at
Shahjahanpur 1,200 maunds of stripped cane per acre contained
17 per cent. of fibre (mostly pure cellulose), 12 per cent. of sucrose,
and 1 per cent. ofinvert sugar. The total quantity of carbohydrate
synthesized per acre in about four months of active growth was
204 maunds of cellulose, 144 maunds of sucrose, and 12 maunds
of invert sugar; in all 960 maunds (13.2 tons) per acre of carbohy-
drates. This means 3-3 tons per acre during the period of active
growth when every assistance as regards choice of variety, soil
fertility, and soil management had been provided.

We have in these Shahjahanpur results a perfect example of the
manufacture of humus by means of a green-manure crop and its
utilization ‘afterwards. Success depends on two things: (1) a
knowledge of the nitrogen cycle and of the conditions under which
humus is manufactured and utilized, and (2) an effective agri-
cultural technique based on these biological principles.

The stage was now ser for getting the Shahjahanpur results
taken up by the cultivators. Two questions had to be settled:

[PAG 246]
A SUCCESSFUL EXAMPLE OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 215

1. Should an attempt be made to introduce the full Shah-
jahanpur methods—improved green-manuring, manured trenches,
and new varieties--or should a beginning be made with green-
manuring plus new varieties with or without trenches according
to circumstances? It was finally decided to introduce the new
variety along with the new method of green-manuring and to omit
the trenches. This decision was made because of the scarcity of
manure for the full Shahjahanpur method. This difficulty, how-
ever, was removed in 1931, the year Clarke left India, with the
introduction of the Indore Process, which could have provided
every village with an adequate supply of manure for intensive
methods. .

2. Should a large organization be created for bringing the
results to the notice of the villagers? At this point the Agricultural
Department was transferred to the control of an Indian Minister,
and Clarke became Director of Agriculture in the United Pro-
vinces and a member of the Legislative Council, offices which he
held with short temporary breaks for ten years. He was thus
provided with administrative powers for developing to the full
the results_of his work as a scientific investigator. The first two
Ministers under whom he served, Mr. C. Y. Chintamani (now
Sir Chirravoori) and the Nawab of Chhatari, though of widely
different political views, were in complete agreement regarding
the necessity of agricultural development and both'gave their
unqualified support to the proposals which were placed before
them, while in the Council itself members of every shade of opinion,
from the extreme Left to the extreme Right, demanded a large
extension of agricultural work. The annual debate on the agri-
cultural budget was one of the events of the year. From 1921 to
1931 the financial proposals of Government for agricultural im-
provement were passed without an adverse vote of any kind. This
was incidentally an example of the success that can be obtained
under a popular Government in India by a Department when it
is backed by efficient technical work. A large number of Members
of the Council were influential landlords, deeply interested in
the development of the country-side, and they, and many others
outside the Council, were anxious to take up something of practical
value. It was therefore decided to start, in the main sugar-growing

[PAG 247]
°

216 : AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH |
areas, Statezaided private farms for the purpose of demonstrating

the new methods ‘of growing cane and providing the large quantity
of planting. material required for the extension of the area under

> the new varieties.

The amount of aid given by the State was small, about Rs. 2,000
to Rs. 3,000 for every. farm. ‘An agreement was entered into,
between the landlords and the Agricultural Department, by which
the former agreed to put'down a certain area under Co 213, to
.green-manure the land and to conduct the cultivation on Shah-
jahanpur lines. Cuttings were to be supplied to the locality at a
certain fixed-rate.. In this way the example and influence of the
landlords was secured at very small cost. At the same time the .
hold of the Agricultural Department on the country-side was

‘ increased and strengthened—the landlords became to all intents

and purposes an essential portion of the higher staff of the Agri-
cultural Department. They differed, however, from the ordinary
District staff in two important respects: (1) they possessed an

‘influence far surpassing that.of the ablest members of the Agri-

cultural Department; (2) they were unofficial and unpaid.

The contributiori of the Indian Jandowners to this work was of
the.gréatest importance. Without their active support and their
‘public spirit in opening farms, and thus setting up a multitude of
local centres for demonstrating on a practical scale the new method
of sugar production, and at the same time providing the material
for planting at a low rate, the Agricultural Department would
have had to fall back on itself for getting the improvements taken
up. In place of the demonstration farms, provided by the land-
lords at an exceedingly low cost, the Government would have had —
to’ acquire land and start local farms for advertising the new
method and for the supply of plant material. The cost would have
been colossal and quite beyond the resources of Government. In
place of the influence and personal interest of the natural leaders
of the country-side, the Agricultural Department would have had
to rely on the work of a host of low-paid subordinates, and would
have had to increase its inspecting staff out of all knowledge. An
unwieldy and expensive organization would have been the result.
All this was rendered unnecessary by the admirable system of
‘private farms. The idea of using the Jandlords in agriculture

[PAG 248]
PLATE IX

6-9261 MNANVHVINVIS INTINDILINI MIONVINAII)
onuop

paar]

[PAG 250]
A SUCCESSFUL EXAMPLE OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 217

began in Oudh in 1914, when a number of private farms were
started on the estates ofthe Talukdars for demonstrating the value
of the new Pusa wheats and for producing the large quantities of
seed needed. Clarke extended this idea to all parts of the Provinces,
and showed how the results obtained at one experimental farm
could be expanded rapidly and effectively by enlisting the active
help of the landowners. He provided them with an opportunity,
eagerly taken up, of showing their value to the community—that
of leadership in developing the country-side by practical examples
of better agriculture which their tenants and neighbours could
éopy. Landlords all the world over will act in a similar way once the
Agricultural Departments can provide them with results of real value.

The magnitude of these operations and the speed with which
they were conducted will be obvious from the following summary
of the final results. In 1916-17 Clarke received about 20 Ib. of
cuttings of Co 213 from Coimbatore for trial. In 1934-5,
33,0c0,000 tons of this variety were produced in the United
Provinces. The value of the crop of Co 213 cane to the cultivator,
at the low minimum rate fixed by Government for sugar-cane
under the Sugar-Cane Act of 1934, was over £20,000,000, more
than half of which was-entirely new wealth. The value of the
sugar which could be manufactured from this was 42,000,000.
A large sum was distributed in factory wages, salaries, and divi-
dends, to say nothing of the benefit to the British engineering trade
and the effect on employment in Great Britain of orders for over
£10,000,000 worth of machinery for new factories. There was no
question of glutting an over-stocked market in India. All the
additional sugar and sugar products were readily absorbed by the
local markets.

Here we have a successful effort in directed economy—the
development of imperial resources by simple technical improve-

. ments in agriculture, rendered possible by the protection of a
valuable imperial market by a straight tariff.

Since Clarke retired from the Indian Agricultural Department,
two new factors—both favourable—have been in operation, which
make it easy to follow up this initial success. The difficulty of
producing enough humus in the villages for the trench system
has been removed by the Indore system of composting. Irrigation

[PAG 251]
8 - AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH

has been improved in the sugar-growing tracts by the completion
of the Sarda Canal and the provision of cheap electric power for
raising water from wells. The two essentials for intensive agri-
culture—humus and .water—are now available. Before long a
detailed account of the progress made by the introduction of the
full Shahjahanpur method will no doubt be available. The story
begun in this chapter can then be carried on another stage. It will
make interesting and stimulating reading.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

CLarke, G., BANERJEE, S. C., Nam Husam, M., and Qayum, A. ‘Nitrate Fluctua-
tions in the Gangetic Alluvium, and Some Aspects of the Nitrogen Problem in
India’, Agricultural Journal of India, xvii, 1922, p. 463.

CLARKE, G. ‘Some Aspects of Soil Improvement in Relation to Crop Production’ A
Proc. of the Seventeenth Indian Science Congress, Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta,

1930, P. 23.

[PAG 252]
° PART V .
CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS

CHAPTER XV"
A FINAL SURVEY

TE capital of the nations which is real, permanent, and inde-

pendent of everything except a market for the products of
farming, is the soil. To utilize and also to safeguard this important
possession the maintenance of fertility is essential.

In the consideration of soil fertility many things besides agri-
culture proper are involved—finance, industry, public health, the
efficiency of the population, and the future of civilization. In this

_ book an attempt has been made to deal with the soil in its wider
aspects, while devoting due attention to the technical side of the
subject.

The Industrial Revolution, by creating a new hunger—that of
the machine—and a vast increase in the urban population, has
encroached seriously on the world’s store of fertility. A rapid
transfer of the soil’s capital is taking place. This expansion in
manufacture and in population would have made little or no
difference had the waste products of the factory and the town been
faithfully returned to the land. But this has not been done.
Instead, the first principle of agriculture has been disregarded:
growth has been speeded up, but nothing has been done to acceler-
ate decay. Farming has become unbalanced. The gap between
the two halves of the wheel of life has been Ieft unbridged, or it
has been filled by a substitute in the shape of artificial manures,
The soils of the world are cither being worn out and left in ruins,
or are being slowly poisoned. All over the world our capital is
being squandered. The restoration and maintenance of soil
fertility has become a universal problem.

The outward and visible sign of the destruction of soil is the
speed at which the menace of soil erosion is growing. The transfer
of capital, in the shape of soil fertility, to the profit and loss account
of agriculture is being followed by the bankruptcy of the land.
The only way this destructive process can be arrested is by

[PAG 253]
220 CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS

restoring the fertility of each field of the catchment area of the |
rivers which are afflicted by this disease of civilization. This
formidable task is going to put some of our oversea administrations
to a very severe test.

The slow poisoning of the life of the soil by artificial manures is
one of the greatest calamitiés which has befallen agriculture and
mankind. The responsibility for this disaster’ must be shared
equally by the disciples of Liebig and by the economic system ~
under which we are living. The experiments of the Broadbalk
field showed that increased crops could be obtained by the skilful
use of chemicals: Industry.at once manufactured these manures
and organized their sale.

The flooding of the English market with cheap food, grown
anywhere and anyhow, forced the farmers of this country to throw
to the winds the old and well-tried principles of mixed farming,
and to save themselves from bankruptcy by reducing the cost 6f
production. But this temporary salvation was paid for by loss of
fertility. Mother earth has recorded her disapproval by the steady
growth of disease in crops, animals, and mankind. The spraying
machine was called in to protect the plant; vaccinesand serums the
animal; in the last resort the afflicted live stock areslaughtered and
burnt. This policy is failing before our eyes. The population, fed
on improperly grown food, has to be bolstered up by an expensive
system of patent medicines, panel doctors, dispensaries, hospitals,
and convalescent homes. A C3 population is being created.

The situation can only be saved by the community as a whole.
The first step is to convince it of the danger and to show the road
out of this impasse. The connexion which exists between a fertile
soil and healthy crops, healthy animals and, last but not least,
healthy human beings must be made known farand wide. Asmany
resident communities as possible, with sufficient land of their own
to produce their vegetables, fruit, milk and milk products, cereals,
and meat, must be persuaded to feed themselves and to demon-
strate the results of fresh food raised on fertile soil. An important
item in education, both in the home and in the school, must be
the knowledge of the superiority in taste, quality, and keeping
power of food, like vegetables and fruit, grown with humus, over
Produce raised on artificials. The women of England—the mothers

[PAG 254]
A FINAL SURVEY 221

of the generations of the future—will then exert their influence
in food reform. Foodstufis will have to be graded, marketed, and
retailed according to the way the soil is manured. The urban
communities (which in the past have prospered at the expense of
the soil) will have to join forces with rural England (which has
suffered from exploitation) in making possible ‘the restitution to
the country-side of its manurial rights. All connected with ‘the
soil—owners, farmers, and labourers—must be assisted financially
to restore the lost fertility. Steps must then be taken ‘to safeguard |
the land of the Empire from the operations of finance. This
is essential because our greatest possession is ourselves and because .
a prosperous and contented country-side is the strongest possible
support for the safeguarding of the country’s future. Failure to
work out a compromise between the needs of the people and
of finance can only end in the ruin of both. The mistakes of
ancient Rome must be avoided. .
One of the agencies which can assist the land to come into its
own is agricultural research. A new type of investigator is néeded.
"The research work of the future must be placed in the hands of a
few men and women, who have been brought up on the land, who
have received a first-class scientific education, and who have
inherited a special aptitude for practical farming. They must
combine in each one of them practice and science. Travel must
be included in their training because a country like Great Britain,
for instance, for reasons of climate and geology, cannot provide
examples of the dramatic way in which the growth factors
operate.
~The approach to the problems of farming must be made from
the field, not from the laboratory. The discovery of the things
that matter is three-quarters of the battle. In this the observant
farmer and labourer, who have spent their lives in close contact
with Nature, can be of the greatest help to the investigator. The
views of the peasantry in all countries are worthy of respect; there
is always good reason for their practices; in matters like the culti-
vation of mixed crops they themselves are still the pioneers.
Association with the farmer and the labourer will help research to
abandon all false notions of prestige; all ideas of bolstering up
their position by methods far too reminiscent of the esoteric

[PAG 255]
222 CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS

priesthoods of the past. Ail engaged on the land must be brother
cultivators together; the investigator of the future will only differ

from the farmer in the possession of an extra implement—science

—and in the wider experience which travel confers. The future
standing of the research worker will depend-on success: on ability
to show how good farming can be made still better. The illusion
that the agricultural community will not adopt improvements
will disappear, once the improver can write his message on the
land itself instead of in the transactions of the learned societies.

‘The natural leaders of the country-side, as has been abundantly
. proved in rural India, are only too ready to assist in this work as

soon as they are provided with real results. No special organiza-
tion, for bringing the results of the experiment stations to. the
farmer, is necessary.

The administration of agricultural research must be reformed.
The vast, top-heavy, complicated, and expensive structure, which
has grown up by accretion in the British Empire, must be swept
away. The time-consuming and ineffective committee must be
abolished. - The vast volume of print must be curtailed. The
expenditure must be reduced. The dictum of. Carrel that ‘the
best way to increase the intelligence of scientists would be to
reduce their number’ must be implemented. The research applied
to agriculture must be of the very best. The. men and women
who are capable of conducting it need no assistance from the
administration beyond the means for their work and protection
from interference. One of the chief duties of the Government will
be to prevent the research workers themselves from creating an
organization which will act as a bar to progress.

The base line of the investigations of the future must bea fertile
soil. The land must be got into good heart to begin with. The
response of the crop and. the animal to improved soil conditions
must be carefully observed. These are our greatest and most
profound experts. We must watch them at work; we must pose
to them simple questions; we must build up a case on their replies
in ways similar to those Charles Darwin used in his study of the
earthworm. Other equally important agencies in research are the
insects, fungi, and other micro-organisms which attack the plant
and the animal. These are Nature’s censors for indicating bad

[PAG 256]
A FINAL SURVEY 223

farming. To-day the policy is to destroy these priceless agencies
and to perpetuate the inefficient crops and animals they are doing
their best to remove. To-morrow we shall regard them as Nature’s
professors of agriculture and as an essential factor in any rational
system of farming. Another valuable method of testing our
practice is to observe the effect of time on the variety. If it shows
a tendency to run out, something is wrong. If it seems to be
permanent, our methods are correct. The efficiency of the agri-
culture of the future will therefore be measured by the reduction
in the number of plant breeders. A few only will be needed when
soils become fertile and remain so.

_ Nature has provided in the forest an example which can be
safely copied in transforming wastes into humus—the key to
prosperity. This is the basis of the Indore Process. Mixed
vegetable and animal wastes can be converted into humus by
fungi and bacteria in ninety days, provided they are supplied
. with water, sufficient air, and a base for neutralizing excessive
acidity. As the compost heap is alive, it needs just as much.care
and attention as the live’stock on the farm; otherwise humus
‘of the best quality will not be obtained.

The first step in the manufacture of humus, in countries like
Great Britain, is to reform the manure heap—the weakest link
in Western agriculture. It is biologically unbalanced because the
micro-organisms are deprived of two things needed to make
humus—cellulose and sufficient. air. It is chemically unstable
because it cannot hold itself together—valuable nitrogen and
ammonia are being lost to the atmosphere. The urban centres
can help agriculture, and incidentally themselves, by providing
the farmers with pulverized town wastes for diluting their manure
heaps and, by releasing, for agriculture and horticulture, the vast
volumes of humus lying idle in the controlled tips.

The utilization of humus by the crop depends partly on the
mycorrhizal association—the living fungous bridge which connects
soil and sap. Nature has gone to great pains to perfect the work
of the green leaf by the previous digestion of carbohydrates and
proteins. We must make the fullest use of this machinery by
keeping up the humus content of the soil. When this is done,
quality and health appear in the crop and in the live stock.

[PAG 257]
-

224 CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS

Evidence is accumulating that such healthy produce is animpor-
tant factor in the well-being of mankind. That our own health is
not satisfactory is indicated by one example. Carrel states that in
the United States’ alone no less than £700,000,000 a year is spent
in medical care. This sum does not include the loss of efficiency
resulting from illness. If the restitution of the manurial rights of
the soils of the United States can avoid even a quarter of this
heavy burden, its importance to the community and to the future
of the American people needs no argument. The prophet is
always-at the mercy of events; nevertheless, I venture to conclude
this book with the forecast that at least half the illnesses of man-
kind will disappear once our food supplies are raised from fertile.
soil and consumed in a fresh condition.

[PAG 258]
APPENDIXES

APPENDIX A

COMPOST MANUFACTURE ON A TEA ESTATE IN
BENGAL

Tue Gandrapara Tea Estate is situated about 5 miles south of the foot-
hills of the Himalayas in North-East India in the district called the
Dooars (the doors of Bhutan): The Estate covers 2,796 acres, of which
1,242 are under tea, and it includes 10 acres of tea seed bushes. There
are also paddy or rice land, fuel reserve, thatch reserves, bamboos,
tung oil, and grazing land. The rainfall varies from 85 to 160 inches
and this amount falls between the middle of April and the middle of
October, when it is hot and steamy and everything seems to grow.

The cold-weather months are delightful, but from March till the
monsoon breaks in June the climate is very trying. i

There are approximately 2,200 coolies housed on the garden; most
of these originally came from Nagpur, but have been resident for a
number of years. The Estate is a fairly-healthy one, being on a plateau

‘ between large rivers; and there are no streams of any kind near or

running through the property. All drainage is taken into a near-by
forest and into waste land. The coolies are provided with houses,
water-supply, firewood, medicines, and medical attention free, and when
ill they are cared for in the hospital freely. Ante-natal and post-natal
cases receive careful attention and are inspected: by the European
Medical Officer each week and paid a bonus; careful records of babies
and their weights are kept and their feeding studied; the Company
provides feeding-bottles, ‘Cow and Gate’ food, and other requirements
to build up a coming healthy labour force. As we survey all living
things on the earth to-day we have little cause to be proud of the use
to which we have put our knowledge of the natural sciences. Soil,
plant, animal, and man himself—are they not all ailing under our care?

The tea plant requires nutrition and Sir Albert Howard not only
wants to increase the quality of human food, but in order that it may be
of proper standard, he wants to improve the quality of plant food.
That is to say, he considers the fundamental problem is the improve-
ment of the soil itsell—making it healthy and fertile. ‘A fertile soil,’
he says, ‘rich in humus, needs nothing more in the way of manure: the
crop requires no protection from pests: it looks after itself’...

In 1934 the manufacture of humus on a small scale was instituted
‘under the ‘Indore method’ advocated by Sir Albert Howard. The
humus is manufactured from the waste products of tea estates. All

Q

[PAG 259]
226 . APPENDIXES

available vegetable matter of every description, such as Agsratum, —
weeds, thatch, leaves, and so forth, are carefully collected and stacked,
put into pits in layers, sprinkled with urinated earth to which a handful
of wood ashes has been added, then a Jayer of broken-up dung, and
soiled bedding; the contents are then watered with a fine spray—not
too much water but well moistened. This charging process is continued
till the pit is full to a depth of from 3 to 4 feet, each layer being watered
with a fine spray as before. .

To do all this it was most necessary to have a central factory, so that
the.work could be controlled and the cost kept as low as possible.
A central factory was erected; details are given in the plan (Plate X);
there are 41 pits each g1X15X3 feet deep; the roofs over these pits
are 33 by 17 feet, space between sheds 12 feet arid between lines of
sheds go feet; also between sheds to fencing 30 feet; this allows materials
to be carted direct to the pits and also leaves room for finished material.
Water has been laid on, a 2-inch pipe with 1-inch standards and
hydrants 54 feet apart, allowing the hose to reach ‘all pits. A fine
spreader-jet is used; rain-sprinklers are also employed witha’ fine
spray. The communal cow-sheds are situated adjacent to the humus
factory and are 50 by 15 feet each and can accommodate 200 head’
of cattle: the enclosure, 173 by 57 feet, is also used to provide outside
sleeping accommodation; there is a water trough 11 feet 6 inches
long by 3 feet wide to. provide water for the animals at all times; the
living houses of the cowherds are near to the site. An office, store, and
chowkidar’s house ‘are in the factory enclosure. The main cart-road
to the lines runs parallel with. the enclosure and during the cold
weather all traffic to and from the lines passes over this road, where
material that requires to be broken down is laid and changed daily
as required. Water for the factory has a good head and is plentiful,
the main cock for the supply being controlled from the office on the
site, All pits are numbered, and records of material used in each. pit

_ are kept, including cost; turning dates and costs, temperatures, water-
ing and lifting, &c., are kept in detail; weighments are only taken
when the liumus is applied so as to ascertain tasks and tons per acre
of application to mature tea, nurseries, tung barees, seed-bearing bushes,
‘or'weak plants. ;
The communal cow-sheds and enclosure are bedded with jungle and
«this is removed ‘as required for the charging of the pits. I have tried
out pits with brick-vents, but I consider that a féw hollow bamboos
placed in the pits give a better-aeration and these vents make it possible
to increase the output per pit, as the fermenting mass can be made
4 to 5 feet deep, Much care has to be taken at the charging of the pits
so that no trampling takes place and a large board across the pits saves
the coolies ffom pressing down the material when charging. At the
first turn all woody material that has not broken down by carts passing

[PAG 260]
PLATE!

PIPE LINE FROM FACTORY TANK

CHOAKIDARS
| HOUSE

B-C=260"

WATER TROUGH

COWSHEP |
SOx 1S

HOUOUOU
NUUUUO

Toi
SHED:

Dogonì
Dododa

PLAN OF THE COMPOST FACTORY, GANDRAPARA TEA ESTATE

[PAG 262]
227

L
over it 5 choppéd UP py a sharP hoe, thus ensuring that full fermenta-
t

tion may 26% gous E” e
i + of the pumus ctory comp! e made
at any the yeats tHe normal pr g about three months
with th tral facto much better supervision ci ven, and >
petter class mus made at nd alongs! de the
at di left for the rains 19 ciel, but
finished PS duct is not nearly 50 ood. 1 therefore P3Y ut and
wither the jal and port thi £ far 35

possible.

In the cold weathers great deal of gheet-composting can be donc
pruning, hum! spread rst the ; hoed in
p gs; pulk of P ngs , but on ections
p to 16 tons per ® have be poed in sith the hum 4 excellent

Onmany E the supply iy vailable cow-dung, anurea nd green
matcrial like equal * the deman qurists U

to make e sh by such pedi ents as hoe! ng-in of SF en crops
and th f shade ces OF decaying Ve ble mat \ that
may inable; ractically gardens sO! is made 9
all forms of organi s, 2 fertility 35 kept UP e mean

jis signifi note that, for many years now, ufacturers wha
specializ und man usually yake nge of pecial
fertilizers contain aN eciable P entage of Th

impo’ of supply the humus y i jous:
T have not 5 conside! the impo! nt q { facilitating the

work of the rroil-bacteria» put it has to be acknowledged that a SUP y
of available humus ÎS essential 19 their well

activities.
Without the beneficia! goil-bacteria there could be n° growth and it

ollows that, however correctly we may USC ch 1 fertilizers accord

ing to 5 theore! i cis oil a supply °

available mus; uu be disappoî pushes,
plighted an iscasi wall be to the E every means
whereby can di upplied tothesoîl ina pra d economic

way CA) e the sy™ hetic att ¢ those who at the present
time ™! d gricultural op

o the above must e added the acration of the soil by drainage
rai

and shade, and d that many planters and estates do not under
stand t most important operation in the cultivation of tea. To
main the fertility * have E rainages shade tres tillage
of various descriptions, an manuring- Compost is essential, prtificials

are a tonic, chile humUSs is a fo and to capi

val account
con most marked in the season just closing: From October
1938 to April goth, 1939 there had been less than ti inches of rain, 2”

[PAG 263]
228 APPENDIXES

consequently the gardens that suffered most from drought were those
that had little store of organic material—drainage, feeding of the soil,
and establishment of shade trees being at fault.

Coolies are allowed to keep their own animals, which graze free on
the Company’s land, and the following census gives an idea of what is
on the property: 133 buffaloes, 115 bullocks, 612 cows, 466 calves,
21 ponies, 384 goats, 64 pigs: in all, 1,795 animals. i

During the past two years practically no chemical manure or sprays
for disease and pest-control have been used, the output for the past
year of humus was about 3,085 tons, while a further 1,270 tons of
forest leaf-mould have been applied. The cost of making and applying
the former is Rs. 2/8/6 per ton, and cost and applying forest leaf-mould
is Rs. 1/3/9 per ton.

The conversion of vegetable and animal waste into humus has been
followed by a definite improvement in soil-fertility.

The return to the soil of all organic waste in a natural cycle is con-
sidered by many scientists to be the mode of obtaining the best-tasting

‘ tea, and to resisting pest and disease.
Nature’s way, they claim, is still the best way.

GANDRAPARA TEA ESTATE,
BANARHAT, P.O. J. G. WATSON.
18 November, 1939.

[PAG 264]
A,

PLATE

COMPOSTING AT GANDRAPARA

“1. Communal cowshed. B. Crushing woody material by read
traffic, C. Sheet-composting of tea prunings

[PAG 266]
APPENDIX B

COMPOST. MAKING AT CHIPOLI, SOUTHERN
RHODESIA

Compost of a kind has been made at Chipoli for a number of years, but
{ill Sir Albert Howard’s methods were mastered some years ago the
waste of material had’ been considerable, the product unsatisfactory,
and the cost, in comparison with that now produced, high.

Deep pits were used and the process was chiefly carried out under
anaerobic conditions, with the result that it took many months and
most of the nitrogen was lost. Farm-yard manure was stored either:
in the stockyards or in large solid heaps, with the result that when the
mass was broken up to be carted on to the fields most of the nitrogen
had been lost, and much of the coarse grass, reeds, and similar matter
used for bedding remained fairly well preserved, much as bog oak in
the mud, and the process of decomposition remained to be completed
in the soil with the growing crop, much to the detriment of the latter.

At Chipoli the compost-field has been laid out on the same principle
as at Indore. Water is laid on and standpipes are situated at regular
intervals. One-inch rubber hose-pipes are used to spray the water
on to the compost heaps. With this arrangement compost can be made
at any time of the year, the normal process taking almost exactly three
months.