=== An Agricultural Testament - Albert Howard.pdf — CHUNK 5/14 ===
Chars: 44,916 | Offset: 177,501



The basis of research work on cotton in India was therefore
disclosed by a study in the field of the crop itself. The problem
was how best to maintain soil aeration and pércolation. This
could be solved if more humus could be obtained.- Good farming
methods therefore provided the key to the cotton problems of
India.

A study of the research work which has been done all over the
world did nothing to modify this opinion. The fundamental weak-
ness in cotton investigations appeared to be the fragmentation of
the factors, a loss of direction, failure to define the problems to be
investigated, and a scientific approach on far too narrow a front
without that balance and stability provided by adequate farming ©
experience.

Steps were therefore taken to accelerate the work on the manu-
facture of humus which had been begun at the Pusa Research
Institute. The Indore Process was the result. It was first necessary
to try it out on the cotton crop. The results are summed up in the
. following Table: -

- TABLE 3
The increase in general fertility at Indore

Area in acres of Tield of the best

improved land | Average yield in | plot of the year |.
Year under cotton 1b, per acre in [b, per acre | Rainfall in inches
1927 20-60 340 384 27°79 (distribution
. good)
1928 6-64 «BIO 515 40:98 (a year of ex-
. cessive rainfall)
1929 36-98 752 23°11 (distribution
poor)

The figures show that, no matter what the amount and distribu-
tion of rainfall were, the application of humus soon trebled the
average yield of seed cotton—200 Ib. per acre—obtained by the
cultivators on similar land in the neighbourhood.

In preparing humus at Indore one of the chief wastes was the

. old stalks of cotton. Before these could be composted they had to

[PAG 88]
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 73

be broken up. This was accomplished by laying them on the estate
roads, where they were soon reduced by the traffic to a suitable
condition for use as bedding for the work-cattle prior to fermenta-
tion in the compost pits.

The first cotton grower to apply the Indore Process was Colonel
(now Sir Edward) Hearle Cole, C.B., C.M.G., at the Coleyana
Estate in the Montgomery District ofthe Punjab, where a compost
factory on the lines of the one at the Institute of Plant Industry at
Indore was established in June 1932. At this centre all available
wastes have been regularly composted since the begirning: the
output is now many thousands of tons of finished humus a year.
The cotton crop has distinctly benefited by the regular dressings
of humus; the quality of the fibre has improved; higher prices are
being obtained; the irrigation water required is now one-third less
than it used to be. The neighbouring estates have all adopted
composting: many interested visitors have seen the work in pro-
gress. One advantage to the Punjab of this work has, however,
escaped attention, namely, the importance of the large quantities

‘ of well-grown seed, raised on fertile soil, contributed by this estate
to the seed distribution schemes of the Provincial Agricultural

Department. Plant breeding to be successful involvés two things—

an improved variety plus seed for distribution grown on soil rich

in humus.

The first member of an Agricultural Department to adopt the
Indore Method of composting for cotton was Mr. W. J. Jenkins,
C.LE., when Chief Agricultural Officer in Sind, who proved that
humus i is of the greatest value in keeping the alkali condition in
check, in maintaining the health of the cotton plant, and in in-
creasing the yield of fibre. At Sakrand, for example, no less than
1,250 cartloads of finished humus were prepared in 1994-5 from

- waste material such as cotton stalks and crop residues.

During recent years the Indore Process has been tried out on
some of the cotton farms in Africa belonging to the Empire Cotton
Growing Corporation. In Rhodesia, for example, interesting
results have been obtained by Mr. J. E. Peat at Gatooma. These
were published in the Rhodesia Herald of August 17th, 1939. Com-
post markedly improved the fibre and increased the yield not only
of cotton but also of the rotational crop of maize.

[PAG 89]
74 © * THE INDORE PROCESS

Why cotton reacts so markedly to humus has only just been
“discovered. The story is an interesting one, which must be placed
on record. In July 1938 I published a paper in the Empire Cotton
Growing Review (vol. xv, no. 3, 1938, p. 186) in which the role of
the mycorrhizal relationship in the transmission of disease resis-
tance from a fertile soil to the plant was discussed. In the last
paragraph of this paper the suggestion was made that mycorrhiza
‘is almost certain to prove of importance to cotton and the great .
differences observed in Cambodia cotton in India, in yield as well
as in the length of the fibre, when grown on (1) garden land (rich
in humus) and (2) ordinary unmanured.land, might ‘well be
explained by this factor’. In the following number of this Journal
(vol. xv, no. 4, 1938, p. 310) I put forward evidence which proved
that cotton is a mycorrhiza-former. The significance of this factor
to the cotton industry was emphasized in the following words:

‘As regards cotton production, experience in other crops, whose
roots show the mycorrhizal relationship, points very clearly to what
will be necessary. More attention will have to be paid to the well tried
methods of good farming and to the restoration of soil fertility by means
of humus prepared from vegetable and animal wastes. An equilibrium
between the soil, the plant and the animal can then be established and
maintained. On any particular area under cotton, a fairly definite
ratio between the number of live stock and the acreage of cotton will
be essential. Once this is secured there will be a marked improvement
in the yield, in the quality of the fibre and in the general health of the
crop. All this is necessary if the mycorrhizal relationship is to act and
if Nature’s channels of sustenance between the soil and the plant are to
function. Any attempt to side-track this mechanism is certain to fail.

‘The research work on cotton of to-morrow will have to start from
a new base line—soil fertility. In the transition between the research ©
of to-day and that of the future, a number of problems now under
investigation will either disappear altogether or take on an entirely

. new complexion. A fertile soil will enable the plant to carry out the
synthesis of proteins and carbohydrates in the green leaf to perfection.
In consequence the toll now taken by fungous, insect and other diseases
will at first shrink in volume and then be reduced to its normal insigni-
ficance. We shall also hear less about soil erosion in places like Nyasa-
land where cotton is grown, because a fertile soil will be able to drink
in the rainfall and so prevent this trouble at the source.’

Confirmation of these pioneering results soon followed. In the
Transactions of the British Mycological Society (vol. xxii, 1939, P- 274)

x

[PAG 90]
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 75

Butler mentions the occurrence of mycorrhiza as luxuriantly de-
veloped in cotton from the Sudan and also in cotton from the
black soils of Gujerat (India). In the issue of Nature of July Ist,
1939, Younis Sabet recorded the mycorrhizal relationship in Egypt.
In the Empire Cotton Growing Review of July 1939 Dr. Rayner con-
firmed the existence of mycorrhiza in both Cambodia and Malvi
cotton grown at my suggestion by Mr. Y. D. Wad at Indore,
Central India, in both black cotton soil and in sandy soil from
Rajputana. > ‘

SISAL

As is well known, the leaves of the sisal plant yield about 93 per
cent. of waste material and about 7 per cent. of fibre, of which
not more than 5 per cent. is ordinarily extracted. The wastes are
removed from the decorticators by a stream of water, usually to
some neighbouring ravine or hollow in which they accumulate.
Sometimes they are led into streams or rivers. The results are
deplorable. Putrefaction takes place in the dumps and nuisance
results, which can be detected for miles. The streams are contami-
nated and the fish are killed. On account of these primitive methods
of waste disposal, the average sisal factory is a most depressing and
disagrecable spot. Further, the water used in these operations—
which has to be obtained at great expense by sinking wells or bore-
holes, by making dams or reservoirs, and then raised by pumping
plants—is allowed to run to waste. Two of the pressing problems,
therefore, of the sisal industry are: (1) the conversion of the solid
residues, including the short fibres, into some useful product like
humus, and (2) the use of the waste water for raising irrigated
crops.

These two problems have been successfully solved on Major
Grogan’s estate at Taveta in Kenya, by the Manager, Major S. C.
Layzell, M.C. The work began in 1935 and has been steadily
developed since. An account of the results was published in the
East African Agricultural Journal of July 1937.

The first problem was to separate the liquid in the flume waste
from the solids. At Taveta all the waste from the decorticator is
passed over a grid at the end of the fume. The grid retains the
solids and allows the acid ‘soup’ to pass into a concrete sump

[PAG 91]
76 ° THE INDORE PROCESS

below, from which it is carried by a suitably graded channel, with
a fall of 1 in 1,000, to the irrigated area. From the grid the solid
waste is moved on slatted trucks (the usual four-wheel frame con-.
structed of timber with a platform of slats arranged at right angled
to the track) to a concrete basin where theyare allowed to drain
The drainage water from this basin is‘led by a small irrigation
furrow to another area where it is utilized for growing crops.
There are thus two sources of irrigation water—the main flume
water and the drainage from the loaded trucks (Plate I).

The lay out of the composting ground is important. Sisal poles,
in groups of four, equally spaced, are arranged on both sides and
at right angles to the rail track. On these poles, placed a foot
apart for providing aeration from below, the waste is lightly spread
to a height of 2 feet in heaps measuring 15 feet by 4 feet. As all
new heaps require a starter, any estate making compost for the
first time should obtain a small supply of freshly made humus
from some other sisal estate which has adopted the Indore Process.
A few handfuls of this old compost, distributed evenly in the heaps,
is sufficient to start fermentation. The waste is left on the poles
for thirty days during which the breaking-down process, by means
of thermophyllic bacteria, begins. The temperature rises to a
point where it is impossible to bear one’s hand in the heap.

The first turn takes place thirty days after the first formation of
the heap when the contents of two heaps are run together into
one, as by this time the volume has considerably decreased. After
the first turn the decomposition is carried a stage further, mainly
by fungi. During this phase the whole heap is often covered each
morning with a long-stemmed toadstool (Plate II).

At the end of another thirty days the second turn takes place.
The ripening process then begins and is completed about the nine-
ticth day after the original heaps were made. Major Layzell writes
that the final product resembles first-class leaf mould and contains
1-44 per cent. of nitrogen. On the basis of its chemical composi-
tién alone the compost has been valued locally at £2 a ton.

A large portion of the humus is devoted to the sisal nurseries in
order that all new areas can be started with vigorous and properly
grown plants. The remainder finds its way to the areas producing
sisal,

[PAG 92]
PLATE

CONVERSION OF SISAL WASTE
a, Filtering the waste. 8. Draining. C. Irrigation with waste-water

[PAG 94]
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 77

The sisal plant only does well on fertile soil and therefore needs
intensive rather than extensive cultivation. Whenever this is for-
gotten the enterprise ends in bankruptcy for the reason that, as
the soil near the factory is exhausted, the lead to the decorticators
soon eats up the profit. The game is no longer worth the candle.
The conversion of the wastes into humus will therefore solve this
problem: the fertility of the land round the factory can be main-
tained and even improved. Further, the dumps of repulsive sisal
waste will be a thing of the past.

The labour employed in dealing with the waste and turning the
heaps from a decorticator producing 120 tons of fibre per month
is thirty-four with two head men. Sixteen additional men were
taken up on the grid and with the trucks, so that a labour force of
fifty in all with two head men was needed for making compost at
this centre. There is no difficulty in handling sisal wastes provided
the workmen are given a supply of some cheap oil for protecting
the skin, otherwise the juice of the leaves produces eczema on.the
arms and legs of those engaged on the work.

The flume liquid is mainly used for growing food crops for the
labour force so as to improve the usual set ration of mealie-meal,
beans, and salt. The psychological effect of all this on the labourers
has been remarkable: the spectacle of a large area of bananas,
sugar-cane, citrus plants, and potatoes removes all fear of a pos-
sible lack of food from the minds of the workers and their families:
they feel safe. Further, their physical hèalth and their efficiency
as labourers rapidly improve. A guaranteed food-supply has
proved a great attraction to labour and has provided a simple and
automatic method of recruitment. .

At Taveta the soil contains a good deal of lime so that the prior
neutralization of the acid irrigation water is unnecessary. On
other estates this point might have to receive attention. Perhaps
the easiest way to get rid of the acidity would be to add sufficient
powdered crude limestone to the flume water just after the solids
have been separated for composting.

Two conditions must be fulfilled before the methods worked out
at Taveta can be adopted elsewhere: (1) there must be a suitable
arca of flat land near the factory for growing irrigated crops;
(2) the general layout must be such that there is ample room for

[PAG 95]
78 . THE INDORE PROCESS

a composting ground to which the wastes can be taken by a light
railway and from which the finished humus can be easily trans-
ported to the irrigated area and to the rest of the estate.

One obvious improvement in the manufacture of humus on a
sisal estate must be mentioned. Animal residues must be added
to the vegetable wastes. If it is impossible to maintain sufficient
live stock for all the sisal waste, two grades of humus should be
made: first grade with animal manure for the parent plants and
the nurseries, second grade for the plants which yield fibre.

MAIZE

One of the great weaknesses in British agriculture at the moment

is the dependence of our live stock—such as pigs, poultry, and
dairy animals—on imported foodstuffs. Our animal industry is
becoming just as unbalanced as regards the supply of nutriment
grown on fertile soil as our urban population. One of the animal
foods imported in large quantities is maize. Unfortunately a large
proportion of this import is being grown on worn-out soils. We
are feeding our animals and indirectly ourselves on produce grown
anywhere and anyhow so long as it is cheap.
. Mother earth, however, has registered an effective protest.
The maize soils of such areas as Kenya and Rhodesia soon showed
signs of exhaustion. The yields fell off. Any one who has had any
practical experience of maize growing could have foretold this.
This crop requires a fertile soil.

The maize growers of Kenya, Rhodesia, and South Africa soon
learnt this lesson. The constant cropping of virgin land with
an exhausting crop rapidly reduced the yield. This happened
just as the Indore Process was devised. Its application to the
maize fields of Kenya and Rhodesia led to good results. The
composting of the maize stalks and other vegetable residues,
including green-manure crops, was taken up all over Kenya and
‘Rhodesia.

Two examples out of many of the results which are being
obtained may be quoted: at Rongai in Kenya, Mr. J. E. A.
Wolryche Whitmore has adopted the Indore Process on three
farms. The working oxen are being bedded down during the

[PAG 96]
CONVERSION OF SISAL WASTE

A. Light railway and foundation of sisal poles. B. Spreading. C. Turned
heaps with layers of elephant grass

[PAG 98]
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 79

night with dry maize stalks, wheat-straw, grass, and other roughage
available. After a week under the cattle this is composted in pits
with wood-ashes and earth from under the animals. Ifinsufficient
earth is used a high temperature is not maintained.. Two turns at
intervals of a month yield a satisfactory product after ninety days.
The effect on the maize crop is very marked. In Rhodesia, Captain
J. M. Moubray has obtained similar results. These are described
in detail in Appendix B (p. 229).

One of the pests of maize in Rhodesia—the flowering parasite
known locally as the witch-weed (Striga lutea)—can be controlled
by humus. This interesting discovery was made by Timson whose
results were published in the Rhodesia Agricultural Journal of October
1938. Humus made from the soiled bedding in a cattle kraal,
applied at the rate of 10 tons to the acre to land severely infested
with witch-weed, was followed by an excellent crop of maize
practically free from this parasite. The control plot alongside was
a red carpet of this pest. A second crop of maize was then grown
on the same land. Again it was free from witch-weed. This para-
site promises to prove a valuable censor for indicating whether or
not the maize soils of Rhodesia are fertile. If witch-weed appears,
the land needs humus; if it is absent, the soil contains sufficient
organic matter. Good farming will therefore provide an automatic
method of control.

Humus is bound to affect the quality of maize as well as the
yield. In the interests both of the maize-exporting and the maize-

- importing countries, a new system of grading and marketing the
produce of fertile soil should be introduced. Maize grown on
land manured with properly made humus and without the help of
artificials should be so described and graded. Only in this way
can well-grown produce come into its own. It should be clearly
distinguished in its journey from the field to the animal and kept
separate from inferior maize. Purchasers will then know that
such graded produce fed to their live stock will have been properly
grown. They will soon discover that it suits their animals. This
question of grading produce according to the way it is grown
applies to many other crops besides maize. Its importance to the
future of farming and the health of the nation is referred to in a
later chapter (p. 221).

[PAG 99]
80 THE INDORE PROCESS

RICE

By far the most important food crop in the world is rice. It will
be interesting therefore to see what response this cereal makes to
humus. We should expect it would be considerable, because the
rice nurseries are always heavily manured with animal manure
and just before transplanting the seedlings are much richer in
nitrogen than at any further stage in the life of the plant.

The first trial of the Indore Process was made by the late Mrs.
Kerr at the Leper Home and Hospital, Dichpali in H.E.H. the
Nizam’s Dominions. Her reaction after reading The Waste Products
of Agriculture in 1931 was: ‘If he is right it will mean the utter
economic revolution of India’s villages.’ Rice was selected as the
crop on which to test the method. She died while the trial was in
progress. The results are summed up in a letter from her husband,
the Rev. G. M. Kerr, dated Dichpali, November 2nd, 1933, as
follows:

‘We have cut three and entirely average portions of our rice fields.
No. 1 plot had 1-25 to 1-5 inches of Indore compost ploughed in. No. 2
plot had some farm rubbish plus $ inch of Indore compost. No. 3 plot
was the control and had nothing. .

‘Since we are eager to get these figures off to you the tabulated weight
results of the straw cannot be given. Plot No. 1 was cut 12 days ago;
plot No. 2 only 2 days ago, and plot No. 3 yesterday. No. 1, therefore,
is dry, and Nos. 2 and 3 are still wet. We have given the straw results
in similar sized bundles, but No. 1 is the better straw and will make
considerably better buffalo fodder (Table 4). .

‘Once we get all our go acres of rice fields fully composted we shall
be able to welcome 50 or 60 more lepers here for cleansing. This is not
a scientific conclusion according to your usual methods of reckoning,
but it is the practical issue as it appeals to us.’

In a subsequent letter dated October roth, 1935, the Dichpali
experience of the Indore Process was summed up as follows:

‘Indore compost is one of the material blessings of this life, like steam,
electricity and wireless. We simply could not do without it here. It
has transformed all our agricultural interests. We have 43 acres under
wet cultivation, and most of the land three years ago was of the poorest
nature, large patches of it so salty that a white alum-like powder lay
on the surface. We have now recovered 28 acres, and on these we are
having a bumper crop of rice this year. There have never been such
crops grown on the'land, at least not for many years. The remaining

[PAG 100]
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 81

15 acres are as before with the rice scraggy and thin, By means of our
factory of 30 pits we keep up a supply of compost, but we can never
make enough to meet our needs. We are now applying it also on our
fields of forage crops with remarkable results. Compost spread over a
field to the depth of about one quarter of an irich ensures a crop at
least three or four times heavier than otherwise could be obtained.’

TABLE 4
Crop results of three plots of rice grown under varying conditions at the
Home for Lepers, Dichpali
No.1 No. 3
Plot Plot

Amount of land measured for the con- | ~
trast. All portions had the same
cultivation =. . | 6,364 sq. ft. |. 6,

Amount of seed sown. All the seed sown

1364 sq. ft. | 6,364 sq. ft.

was the same quality =. . .|- 6Ib. 6 Ib.
Amount of rice taken in each case by
measure, not weight . 422 tb. So Ib.

Amount of straw in similar sized bundles 138 bundles | 106 bundles | 40 bundles

The marked response of rice to organic matter in the rice
nurseries is well known. The Dichpali results prove that the trans-
planted crop also responds to humus. In the nurseries the soil
conditions are aerobic: after transplanting, the roots of the crops
are under water, when the oxygen supply largely depends on the
activities of algae. How does humus influence the rice plant in
water culture under conditions when the active oxygen must be
dissolved in water? Do the roots of rice in the nurseries and also
after transplanting exhibit the mycorrhizal relationship? If they
do, the explanation of the Dichpali results is simple. If they do
not,-how then does humus in wet cultivation influence photo-
synthesis in the green leaf? Nitrification of the organic matter
would seem difficult under such conditions for two reasons: (1) the
process needs abundaat air; (2) the nitrate when formed would
undergo excessive dilution by the large volume of water in the rice
fields. If, however, the mycorrhizal association occurs in trans-
plantéd rice, the Dichpali results explain themselves.

While this book was passing through the press specimens of
surface roots of transplanted rice, 116 days from the date of sowing,
grown in soil manured with humus, were collected on October

(e)

[PAG 101]
THE IND
7th, 1939, by Mr, y. D. Wag in Jhaby tate, Centra} dia
They Were ex. d by Dr Ida Levi on Dece ber Irth
939, Whose Teport reads ag follo
‘The Outer laterals Of the first org how spread 6 Phic
YCorrhiza] Cction, the Mycorrhiz, Bions 'S Indica, cra.
SCOpica]] Pacity. beading and th, absen Toot h e
active h hae are Of wide diameter; ¥ through the cell
Walls fo; » Vesicles and arb: 3 they OW the e. Y and
ater 5 gestion, er anular Materia]
APPears to b idly transloca d fr the cells»
that ri

stance as the tr
8rain will în all Probability be found to depeng on the efficiency
0: al as : .

EGETABLES

ne Proble: Market 8ardening € open and
Under g]. IPply of humus, the Past, when OFse trans
Port was th € numb Of these US Were kept
în th , i, Near London fo ple, for the
vagzons v h Crates of Vegetables for e carl
Mornj 'S Market ¢ Ki load o nure, The introductio
E the ing, Sine change “a genera] shorta,
ol manure resulted, 7, tc. Market dens are Not run in
Connexjon I >» SO the, no Possibility’ of
Making TEAS selfs, PPorting Tegards anure: th essen.
Bal anim Us do n eresultis that a ‘5 Proportion

© Vegetables sold ies ig raised o, cal manur
In this “ sfact, Yield is Possible, but ; ‘aste, quality,
and keep ro; © produc, is m ‘kedly Inferior 1, th
Vegetables Taised re.

“yi . .
IS an easy Matter to distinguish vegetables Talsed on NPK,
They are tough, leathery, and fibrons: they also lack taste. In
marked Contrast those STOWN with humus are tender, brittle, and

[PAG 102]
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 83

. country, and also in every home, should be the difference between
vegetables, salads, potatoes, and fruit grown with humus or with
artificials. Evidence is accumulating that liability to common
ailments like colds, measles, and so forth becomes much less when
the vegetables, fruit, potatoes, aud other food consumed are raised
from fertile soil and eaten fresh. . 7

How is the necessary humus for the high-quality vegetables
needed by urban areas to be obtained? Two solutions of the
problem are possible.

In the first place, market gardening should, whenever possible,
be conducted as a branch of mixed farming with an adequate
head of live stock, so that all the waste products, vegetable and
animal, of the entire holding can be converted into humus by the
Indore Process. The first trial of this system was carried out at the
Iceni Nurseries, Surfleet, Lincolnshire. ‘The work commenced in
December 1935 and can best be described in Captain Wilson’s
own words taken from a memorandum he drew up for the mem-
bers of the British Association who visited his farm on September
4th, 1937:

“The Iceni Estate consists of about 325 acres comprised as follows:

Arable Jand, &c. . . . . . + 225 acres
Permanent grassland . . . . . «30 4,
Rough wash grazings . ees . ‘35 »
Land under intensive horticulture . . . - 35 os

‘The main idea in the development of the estate has been to prove
that even to-day, in certain selected areas of England, it is a commercial
proposition to take over land which has been badly farmed, and bring
it back to a high state of fertility, employing a large number of persons
per acre,

“To this end the estate has been developed as a complete agricultural
unit with a proper proportion of live stock, arable land, grass land and
horticulture, with the belief that after a few years of proper manage-—
ment the estate can become very nearly, if not entirely, a self-supporting
«unit, independent of outside supplies of chemical manures, &c., and
feeding stuffs, the land being kept in a high state of fertility, which is
quite ‘unusual to-day, by:

(1) A proper balance of cropping.

(2) The conversion of all wheat straw into manurc in the crew yards

and the utilization of this manure and as much as possible of
the waste products of the land for making humus for the soil.

[PAG 103]
84 : THE INDORE PROCESS

‘As regards (2), the method of humus-making which has been em-
ployed is known as “The Indore Process”, and it has proved remarkably
successful. The output in 1936 amounted to approximately 700 tons,
and in the current year will probably be about 1,000 tons.

‘As a result of this utilization of humus, the land under intensive
cultivation has already reached a state of independence, and for the
last two years no chemicals have been used in the gardens at all either as ferti-
lizers or as sprays for disease and pest control. The only wash which has been
used on the fruit trees is one application each winter of lime sulphur,
and it is hoped to eliminate this before long.

‘The farm land is not yet independent of the purchase of fertilizers,
but the amount used has been steadily reduced from 106 tons used in
1932, costing £675, to 40} tons in the current year, costing £281.
Similarly the. potato crop, which formerly was sprayed four or five
times, is now only sprayed once, and this it is hoped will also be dis-
pensed with before many years when the land has become healthy and.
in a proper state of fertility.

‘Eventually, with a properly balanced crop rotation, there is no
doubt in my mind that the same degree of independence can be reached
on the farm as has already been attained on my market-garden land.

‘The probable cropping will eventually work out as follows:

75 acres potatoes. ”

75 acres wheat.

25 acres barley, oats, beans and linseed (for stock feeding).

- 15 acres roots (for stock feeding).

30 acres one year clover and rye-grass leys for feeding with pigs and

poultry and cutting for hay, ploughing in the aftermath.

‘The live stock carried on the farm at the June returns was as follows:

22 cattle (cows and young stock of my own breeding).
14 horses (including foals).
15 sows (for breeding).

103 other pigs.

120 laying hens (of my own stock).

‘And although it is rather early to say, I believe that the above
figures may be about right for the size of the farm, with the addition of
about 20 cattle for winter yard feeding. This latter importation will be
rendered unnecessary in a few years when the number of cattle of my
own breeding will have increased.’

Since this memorandum a further adyance has been made at
Surficet. The factor which at present limits production on the
alluvial soils in the Holland Division of Lincolnshire (in which
Captain Wilson’s vegetable garden is situated) is undoubtedly soil
aeration. These soils pack easily, so the supply of oxygen for the

[PAG 104]
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 85

micro-organisms in the soil and for the roots of the crops is
‘ frequently interrupted. Sub-soil drainage tends to reduce -this
adverse factor. During the autumn of 1937 the whole of Captain
Wilson’s vegetable area was-pipe drained. As was expected, the
improvement in soil aeration which instantly followed has enabled
the crops to obtain the full benefit of humus. Here is a definite
- example where the establishment of Nature’s equilibrium between
the soil, the plant, and the animal has resulted in increased crops
and in higher quality ‘produce.

Another and perhaps a simpler solution. of the organic matter
problem in vegetable growing is to make use ofthe millions of tons
of humus in the controlled tips in the neighbourhood of our cities
and towns. This subject is discussed in detail in Chapter VIII.

VINE
A comparison between the cultivation of the vine in the East
_ and the West is interesting in more than one respect. In the

Orient this crop is grown mostly for food: in the Occident, includ-
‘ing Africa, most of the grapes are made into wine.

The feature of the cultivation of the vine in Asia is the long life
of the variety, the universal use of animal manure, and the com-
parative absence of insect and fungous diseases. Artificial manures,
spraying machines, and poison sprays are unknown.

In the West the balance between the area under vines and the
number of live stock has been lost: the vine has largely displaced
the animal: the shortage of farm-yard manure has been made up
by the chemical fertilizer: the life of the variety is short: insect and
fungous diseases are universal: the spraying machine and the
poison spray are to be seen everywhere: the loss of balance in
grape growing has bcen accompanied by a lowering in the quality
of the wine.

During the last three summers, in the course of extensive tours
in Provence, a sharp look-out was kept for vineyards in which the
appearance of the vines tallied in all respects with those of Central
Asia, namely, well-grown plants which looked thoroughly at home,
and in which the foliage and young growth possessed real bloom.
At last near the village of Jouques in the Department of Bouches
du Rhéne such vines were found. They had never reccived any

[PAG 105]
86 ; THE INDORE PROCESS

artificials, only animal manure: the vineyard had a good local
reputation for the quality of its wine. Arrangements were made

- with the proprietress to have the active roots examined. They
exhibited the mycorrhizal association. The vine is a mycorrhiza-
former and therefore humus in the soil is essential for perfect
nutrition ;-the long life of the variety and the absence of disease in
Central Asia are at once explained.

In a recent survey of fruit growing in the Western Province of

the Union of South Africa, which appeared in the Farmer's Weekly

_ (Bloemfontein) of August 23rd, 1939, Nicholson refers to a local
vineyard, on the main road between Somerset West and Stellen-
bosch, which has taken up the Indore Process: :

‘Motorists -travelling along this road cannot help noticing how
healthy this farmer’s vineyards look and how orderly is the whole farm.
Early this winter I visited it in time to see the huge stacks of manure—
beautiful, finely rotted bush which had been helped to-reach that state
by being placed in the kraal under the animals. Pigs had played their
part too. During the wine-pressing season all the skins of the grapes
are fed to the pigs and later returned to the vineyards in the form of
manure.’

When the vine growers of Europe realize how much they are
losing by an unbalanced agriculture in the shape of the running
out of the variety, loss of resistance to disease, and loss of quality
in the wine, steps will no doubt be taken by a few of the pioneers
to increase the head of live stock, to convert all the available
wastes into humus, and to get back to Nature as quickly as possible.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Dyxowp, G. C. ‘Humus in Sugar-cane Agriculture’, South African Sugar Technologists,
1938. . .
Howano, A. ‘The Manufacture of Humus by the Indore Process’, Journal of the Royal

Society of Arts, Ixxxiv, 1935, p. 25 and bocv, 1936, p. 144.
—— ‘Die Erzcugung von Humus nach der Indore-Methode’, Der Tropenpflanzer,
raxxix, 1936, p. 46.
—— ‘The Manufacture of Humus by the Indore Process’; ; Journal of the Ministry of
Agriculture, xlv, 1938, p. 431.
—— ‘En Busca del Humus, Revista del Instituto de Defensa del Café de Costa Rica, vii,

1939; P- 427.
LAYZELL, S. È ‘The Composting of Sisal Wastes’, East African Agricultural Journal, iti,
1937; P.

Tause, G. vom nd Wap, Y. D. ‘Humus-manufacture from Cane-trash’, International
Sugar Journal, 1935, p. 260.

[PAG 106]
CHAPTER VI
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE INDORE PROCESS

GREEN-MANURING .

nce Schultz-Lupitz first showed about 1880 how the open
S sandy soils of North Germany could be improved in texture
and in fertility by the incorporation of a green crop of lupins,
the possibilities of this method of enriching the land have been
thoroughly explored by the Experiment Stations. After the role
of the nodules on the roots of leguminous plants in the'fixation of
atmospheric nitrogen was proved, the problems of green-manuring
naturally centred round the utilization of the leguminous crop in
adding to the store of combined nitrogen and organic matter in
the soil.. At the end of the nineteenth century it seemed so easy,
by merely turning in a leguminous crop, to settle at one stroke
and in a very economical fashion the great problem of maintaining
soil fertility. At the expenditure of a little trouble, the leguminous
nodule might be used as a nitrogen factory while the remainder
of the crop could provide humus. All this might be accomplished
at small expense and without any serious interference with ordinary

cropping. These expectations, a natural legacy of the NPK men-

tality, have led to innumerable green-manuring experiments all
over the world with practically every species of leguminous crop.
In a few cases, particularly in open, well-acrated soils where the
rainfall after the ploughing in of the green crop was well distributed
and ample time was given for decay, the results have been satis-
factory. In the majority of cases, however, they have been dis-
appointing. It will be useful, therefore, to examine the whole
subject and to determine if possible the reasons why this method
of improving the fertility of the soil seems so often to have
failed. i
A consideration of the factors involved in the growth, decay,
and utilization of the residues of a green crop will at once explain
the general failure of green-manuring to increase the following
cropand also put an end for all time to the somewhat extravagant
hopes of repeating the German results, which succeeded because
all the factors, including time, happened to be favourable. It is

[PAG 107]
88 È. ‘THE INDORE PROCESS ~
no use slavishly copying this method unless we can at the same
time reproduce the North German soil and climatic conditions.
_ The chief factors in green-manuring are: (1) a knowledge of
the nitrogen cycle in relation to the local agriculture; (2) the
conditions necessary for rapid growth and also for the formation
of abundant nodules on the roots of the leguminous crop used for
green-manuring; (3) the chemical composition of the green crop
at the moment it is ploughed in; (4) the soil conditions during the
period when decay takes place. These four factors must be studied
before the possibilities of green-manuring can be explored.

The importance of the nitrogen cycle in relation to the local
agriculture is a factor in green-manuring to which far too little
attention has been paid. As will be shown more fully in Chap-
ter XIV, the full possibilities of green-manuring can only be
utilized when we know at what periods of the year nitrate accu-
mulations take place, how these accumulations fit in with the local
agricultural practice, and when nitrates are liable to be lost by
leaching and other means. If the crop does not make the fullest
use of nitrate, this precious substance must be immobilized by
means cf green-manure or by means’of weeds and algae. It must
not be left to take care of itself. It must cither be taken up by the
crop or banked by some other plant.

The soil conditions necessary for the growth of the leguminous
crop uscd as a green-manure have never been sufficiently studied.
Clarke found at Shahjahanpur in India that it was advantageous
to apply a small dressing cf farm-yard manure to the land just
before the green crop is sown. The effect of this is ‘to stimulate
growth and nodular development in a remarkable way. Further,
the green crop when turned in decays much faster than when this
preliminary manuring is omitted. It may be that besides stimu-
lating nodular development the small dressing of farm-yard
manure is necessary to bring into effective action the mycorrhizal
association which is known to exist in the roots of most leguminous
plants. This association is a factor which has been completely
forgotten in green-manuring. There is no reference to it in Waks-
man’s excellent summary on pp. 208-14 of the last edition of his
monograph on humus. This tactor will probably also prove to be
important in the utilization of the humus left by green-manuring.

[PAG 108]
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 89

The living bridge between the humus in the soil and the plant
must be properly fed, otherwise the nutrition of the crop we wish -
to benefit is almost certain to suffer.

As growth proceeds the chemistry of a green crop alters very
considerably: the material in a young or in a mature crop, when
presented to the micro-organisms of the soil, leads to very different
results. Waksman and Tenney have set out the results of the
decomposition of a typical green-manure plant (rye) harvested at
_ different periods of growth. When the plants are young they

. decompose rapidly: a large part of the nitrogen is released as
ammonia and becomes available. When the plants are mature
they decompose much more slowly: there is insufficient nitrogen
for decay, so the micro-organisms utilize some. of the soil nitrates
to make up the deficiency. Instead of enriching the soil in avail-
able nitrogen the decay of the crop leads to temporary impoverish-
ment. These fundamental matters are summed up in the following
Table:

TABLE 5

Rapidity of decomposition of rye plants at different stages of growth
. (Waksman and Tenney)

‘Two grammes of dry material decomposed for 27 days

Nitrogen liberated as | Nitrogen consumed

Stage of growth CO, given off « ammonia © from the medium
mg. GC . mg. N mg. N

Plants only 25~35 cm. ” .

igh 286-8 22-2 : (o)
Just before heads begin

to form. 280-4 370 o

Just before bloom . 1995 o . 75
Plants nearly mature , | 187-9 o 89

The amount of humus which results from the decay of a green
crop also depends on the age of the plants. Young plants, which
are low in lignin and in cellulose, leave a very small residue of
humus. Mature plants, on the other hand, arc high in cellulose
and lignin and yield a large amount of humus. These differences
are brought out in Table 6 on p. go.

It follows from these results that if we wish to employ green-
manuring to increase the soil nutrients quickly, we must always

[PAG 109]
90 - THE INDORE PROCESS

plough in the green crop in the young stage; if our aim is to in-
crease the humus content of the soil we must wait till the green-
manure crop has reached its maximum growth.

The soil conditions after the green crop is ploughed in are no
less important than the chemical composition of the crop. The

TABLE 6

Formation of humus during decomposition of rye plants at different stages
of development (Waksman and Tenney)

vu - At beginning of :
Chemical constituents decomposition® At the end of decomposition period}
JUST BEFORE HEADS BEGIN TO FORM
mg. mg. % original
Total water-insoluble - % rigia
organic matter. 7,465 2,015 270
Pentosans . . 2,050. 380 “1855
Cellulose. . . 2,610 610 23°4
Lignin . . . 1,180 750 63-6
Protein insoluble in :
water. . . 816 i 253 gro
PLANTS NEARLY MATURE _
. mg. mg. % original
Total water-insoluble % i
organic matter. 15,114, 8,770 58-0
Pentosans . «| 3,928 39°5
Cellulose. . . 6,262 44°2
Lignin. . . 3:403 88-7
_ Protein insoluble in
water. . . 286-7

* 10 gm. material (on dry basis) used for young plants and 20 gm. for old plants.
+ 30 days for young plants and 60 days for mature plants.

micro-organisms which decay the green-manure require four
things: (1) sufficient combined nitrogen and minerals; (2) mois-
ture; (3) air; (4) a suitable temperature... These must all be
provided together.

The factor which so often leads to trouble is the poverty of the
soil—insufficient combined nitrogen and minerals. It follows,
therefore, that when a mature crop is ploughed in the effect of its
decay on the next crop will always depend on the fertility of the
soil. Ifthe soil is in a poor condition most of the combined nitrogen
available will be immobilized for the decay of the green-manure;

[PAG 110]
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 9I

the next crop will suffer from starvation; green-manuring will
then be a temporary failure. If, however, the soil is fertile or if
we plough in freshly prepared humus with the green crop, the
extra combined nitrogen needed for decay will then be present;
the next crop will not suffer. Soil fertility in this, as in so many
other matters, gives the farmer considerable latitude. All sorts of
things can be done with perfect safety with a soil in good heart
which are out of the question when the soil is infertile. A good
reserve of fertility, therefore, will always be an important factor
in green-manuring.

As the decomposition of a green crop is carried out by micro-
- organisms, decay ceases if the moisture falls below a certain
point.

Again, if the air supply is cut off by excessive rain after plough-
ing in or by burying the green crop too deeply, an anaerobic soil
flora rapidly develops which proceeds to obtain its oxygen supply
from the substratum. The valuable proteins are attacked and their
nitrogen is released as gas. The chemical reactions of the peat bog
replace those of the early stages of a properly managed compost
heap. This frequently happens under monsoon conditions and is
one of the reasons why green-manuring is so often unsatisfactory
in tropical agriculture.

Finally, the temperature factor is important in countries like
Great Britain which have a.winter. Here green-manure crops
must often be turned in during the autumn before the soil gets too
cold, so that the early stages of decay can be completed before
winter comes.