=== An Agricultural Testament - Albert Howard.pdf — CHUNK 6/14 ===
Chars: 44,987 | Offset: 222,417



The uses of green-manuring in agriculture can now be con-
sidered. Generally speaking they fall into three classes: (1) the ©
safeguarding of nitrate accumulations; (2) the production of
humus, and (3) a combination of both.

THE SAFEGUARDING OF NITRATE ACCUMULATIONS
In studying this important matter we must at the outset consider
how Nature, if left to herself, always deals with the nitrates pre-
pared from organic matter by the micro-organisms in the soil.
They are never allowed to run to waste but are immobilized by
plants including the film of algae in the surface soil. These latter

[PAG 111]
gz THE INDORE PROCESS
are easily decomposed: they are therefore exceedingly valuable
agencies for safeguarding nitrates.

The farmer has at his command two methods of nitrate im-
mobilization. He can either intercept his surplus nitrate accumula-

.tions by sowing a leguminous crop or by managing his weeds and
soil algae so that they do the same thing automatically. In either”
case nitrates which would otherwise run to waste are converted
into young fresh growth which cannot then be lost by leaching
and which later on can be rapidly converted back into available
nitrogen and minerals by the organisms in the soil. Obviously if
weeds can be managed so that all nitrate accumulations can be
utilized and the resulting growth can be turned under and decom-
posed in time for-the next crop, there is no need to sow a leguminous
crop to do what Nature herself can do so much better.

One of the best examples I have seen of the combined use of
weeds and catch crops for immobilizing nitrates was worked out
by Mr. L. P. Haynes on the large hop garden of Messrs. Arthur
Guinness, Son & Co. at Bodiam in Sussex. Surface cultivation in
this garden ceases in August soon after the hops form. A little
mustard is then sown which, with the chickweed, soon produces
a green carpet without interfering with the ripening of the hops.
At picking time the mixed seedlings are well established, after
which they have the nitrates formed at the end of the summer and
‘in early autumn entirely to themselves. Growth is very rapid.
During the autumn shcep are brought in to graze the mustard.
Their urine and dung fall on the chick-weed and so contribute a
portion of the essential animal wastes. In the spring the easily -
decomposed chickweed is ploughed into the fertile soil and de-
cayed in good time for the next crop of hops. The soil of this hop
garden is now heavily charged with chickweed secds so that the
moment surface cultivation is stopped the following August a new
crop starts. This management of a common weed of fertile soil to
fit in with the needs of the hop appeared to me to be nothing
short of a stroke of genius. It would: be difficult to find a more
efficient green-manure crop than the one Nature has provided for
nothing. Could there be a better example of the use of a fertility
reserve for rapidly decomposing a green crop in the carly spring?
The ground at Bodiam is hardly ever uncovered; it is occupied

[PAG 112]
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 93

either by hops or by chickweed; one crop dovetails into the other;
the energy of sunlight is almost completely utilized throughout the
year; the invisible labour force of the hop garden—earthworms
and micro-organisms—is kept fully occupied. As the use of artifi-
cials and poison sprays is reduced, there will be a corresponding
increase in efficiency in this section of the unseen establishment.

Much more use might be made of this method of green-manur-
ing in countries like Great Britain, In fruit, vegetable, and potato
growing particularly, there seems no reason why an autumn crop
of weeds should not be treated as green-manure on Bodiam lines.
If the land is in good heart, the soil will have no difficulty in decay-
ing the weeds. Ifthe land is poor in organic matter, a dressing of
freshly prepared humus of not less than 5 tons to the acre should
be spread on the weeds before they are turned under.

THE PRODUCTION OF HUMUS .

The production of humus, by means of a green-manure crop,
is a much more difficult matter than the use of this method for
immobilizing nitrates. Nevertheless, it is of supreme importance
in the maintenance of soil fertility. The factors involved in the
transformation of green-manure into humus in the soil are the

-same as those in the compost heap. All factors must operate
together. Failure of one will upset the process entirely. If this
occurs the next crop will be sown in soil which has been placed
in an impossible condition. The land will be called upon to com-
plete the formation of humus and to grow a crop at the same time.
This is asking too much. The soil will take up its interrupted task
and proceed with the manufacture of humus. It will neglect the
crop. The uncontrollable factor is the rainfall. It must be just
right if humus manufacture in the soil is to succeed. In India, for
example, during an experience of twenty-six years it used to be
just right about once in six or seven years. It was completely
wrong in the remainder. Often there was too much rain after
ploughing in, when the aerobic phase never developed and bog
conditions were established instead. At other times there was
insufficient rain for the early fungous stage. Where, however,
irrigation is available, any shortage of the Indian monsoon makes
no difference.

[PAG 113]
94 THE INDORE PROCESS

In exceptional cases, however, it is possible to carry on the
manufacture of humus in the soil without any risk of temporary
failure. One British example may be quoted. On some of the
large farms in the Holland Division of Lincolnshire peas are
grown as a rotation crop with potatoes. The problem is to manu-
facture humus before the next crop of potatoes is planted. This
has been solved. Early in July the peas are cut and carried to the
shelling machines where the green séeds are separated and large
, quantities of crushed haulm are left. Immediately after the re-
moval of the peas the land is sown with beans. The crushed pea
haulm is then scattered on the surface of the newly sown land
followed by a light dressing of farm-yard manure—about 6 or 7
tons to the acre. The beans grow through the fermenting layer
on the surface of the soil and help to keep it moist. While the
beans are growing humus is being manufactured in a thin sheet
all over the field. At the end of September, when the beans are in
flower, this sheet composting on the ground is complete. The
green crop is then lightly ploughed -in together with a layer of
freshly prepared compost. Humus manufacture is then continued
in the soil, The beans under these conditions decay quickly; the
process of humus manufacture is completed before the planting
of the next potato crop. ”

THE SAFEGUARDING OF NITRATES FOLLOWED BY THE
n MANUFACTURE OF HUMUS
The immobilization of nitrates by means of a greén crop fol-
lowed by the conversion of the green-manure into humus needs
time and complete control of all the operations. An example of
the successful use of this method is described in Chapter XIV
(p. 211). Heavy crops of sugar-cane were produced at Shah-
jahanpur in the United Provinces by intercepting the nitrates
accumulated at the break of the south-west monsoon by means of
a leguminous crop and then'converting this into humus with the
assistance of the autumn accumulation of nitrate in the same soil.

It follows from the principles underlying green-manuring and
the applications of these principles to agricultural practice that
the ploughing in of a green crop is not a simiple question of the
addition of so many pounds of nitrogen to the acre but a vast and

[PAG 114]
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE INDORE PROCESS . 95

many-sided biological problem. Moreover it is dynamic, not
static; the agents involved are alive; their activities must fit in
with one another, with agricultural ‘practice on the one hand
and with the season on the other. If we attempt to solve such a
complex on the basis of mere nitrogen content or on that of
carbon : nitrogen ratios, we are certain to run counter to great
biological principles and come into conflict with one rule in
Nature after another. It is little wonder, therefore, that green-
manuring has led to so much misunderstanding and to so much
disappointment.

THE REFORM OF GREEN-MANURING

The uncertainties of humus manufacture in. the soil can be
overcome by growing the green crop to provide material for com-
posting. This of course adds to the labour and the expense, but
in many countries it is proving a commercial proposition. In
Rhodesia, for example, crops of san hemp are now regularly
grown to provide litter, rich in nitrogen, for mixing with maize
stalks so as to improve the carbon : nitrogen ratio of the bedding
used in the cattle kraals. In this way the burden on the soil is
greatly reduced; it is only called upon to decay what is left of the
root system of the green crop at harvest time. Humus manufacture
is shared between the soil and the compost heap.

In converting materials low in nitrogen (such as sugar-cane
leaves and cotton stalks) into humus it is an immense advantage to
mix these refractory materials with some leguminous plant in the
green state. The manufacture of humus is speeded up and simpli-
fied; the amount of water needed is reduced; the land on which
the green crop was raised benefits.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

CLarke, G. ‘Some Aspects of Soil Improvement in relation to Crop Production’,
Proc. of the Seventeenth Indian Science Congress, Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta,
1930, p. 28.

WAaRSMAN, S. A., and Tenney; F. G. ‘Composition of Natural Organic Materials and
their Decomposition in the Soil, Soi! Science, xxiv, 1927, p.275; xxviii, 1929, P. 553
and xxx, 1930, p. 143.

[PAG 115]
“CHAPTER VII
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE INDORE PROCESS

GRASS-LAND MANAGEMENT

TY very different metliods of approach to the problems of
grass-land management in a country like Great Britain are
possible. We can either study the.question from the point of view
of the present organization of agricultural research in this country ‘
or we can bring the world-wide experience of the grass and clover
families to bear as if no institutions like the Welsh Plant Breeding
Station, the Rowett Institute at Aberdeen, or ‘the Rothamsted
Experiment Station—all of which deal independently with some
fragment of the grass-land problem—had ever been contemplated.
As the advantages of the fresh eye are many and obvious and as
' the writer has had a long and extensive first-hand experience of
the cultivation of a number of crops belonging to the grass and
clover families, the principles underlying grass-land management
in Great Britain will be considered from a new angle, namely, the
conditions which practical experience in the tropics has shown to
be necessary for grasses and legumes to express themselves and to
tell their own story.

The grass and clover families are widely distributed and culti-
vated all over the world—from the tropics to the temperate zones
and at all elevations and under every possible set of soil and mois-
ture conditions—either as separate crops or more often mixed
together. Everywhere the equivalent of the short ley, composed
of grasses and legumes, is to be found. The successful mixed
cultivation of these two groups of plants has been in operation for
many centuries: in the Orient they were grown together in suit-
able combinations long before England emerged from the primi-
tive condition in which the Roman invaders found it—an island
covered for the most part with dense forests and impassable bogs.

What are the essential requirements of the grass and clover
families? The clearest answer to this question is supplied by
tropical agriculture; here the growth factors impress themselves
on the plant much more definitely and dramatically than they do

[PAG 116]
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 97

in a damp temperate island like Great Britain where all such
reactions are apt to be very much toned down and even blurred.

Sugar-cane, maize, millets, and the dub grass of India (Cynodon

dactylon Pers.) are perhaps the most widely cultivated and the most
suitable grasses for this study. Lucerne, san hemp (Crotalaria
juncea L.), the cluster bean (Cyamopsis psoralioides D.C.), and the
pigeon pea (Cajanus indicus Spreng.) are corresponding examples
of the clover family. The last two of these are almost always grown
mixed either with millets or maize, very much in the same way as
red clover and rye-grass are sown together in Great Britain.

The grass family must first be considered. A detailed account
of the cultivation of the sugar-cane will be found in a Jater chapter
(p. 200). Humus and ample soil aeration, combined with new
varieties which suit the improved soil conditions, enable this grass

‘to thrive, to resist disease, and to produce maximum yields and
high quality juice without any impoverishment of the soil. Maize
behaves in the same way and is perhaps one of our best soil
analysts. Any one who attempts to grow this crop without organic
matter will begin to understand how vital soil fertility is for the
grass family. ‘The requirements of the dub grass in India, one of
the most important fodder plants of the tropics, are frequent
cultivation and abundance of humus. The response of this species
to a combination of humus and soil aeration is even more remark-
able than in maize: once these factors are in defect growth stops. -
The behaviour of dub grass, as will be seen later on, indicates
clearly what all grasses-the world over need.

Any one who grows lucerne in India under irrigation will court
certain failure unless steps are taken to keep the crop constantly
supplied with farm-yard manure and the aeration of the surface
soil at a high level. When suitable soil conditions are maintained
it is possible to harvest twenty or more good crops a year. Once
the surface soil is allowed to pack and regular manuring is stopped,

"avery different result is observed. The number of cuts falls off to
‘ three or four a year and the stand rapidly deteriorates. When san
hemp is grown for green-manuring or for seed in India satisfactory
results are only obtained if the crop is manured with cattle manure
or humus. These two leguminous crops do not stand alone. Every
member of this group I have grown responds at once to farm-

î H

[PAG 117]
98 THE INDORE PROCESS

yard manure or humus. But all this is not in accordance with
theory.

According to the text-books the nodules in the roots of legumi-
nous plants should be relied on to furnish combined nitrogen and
this group should not need nitrogenous manure. ‘Practical experi-
ence and theory are so wide apart as to suggest that some other.
factor must be in operation. It was not till January 1938.that I
discovered what this factor was. On the Waldemar tea estate in
Ceylon I saw a remarkable crop of a green-manure plant—Crota-
laria anagyroides—growing in soil rich in humus. The root develop-
ment was exceptional: an examination of the active roots showed
that they were heavily infected with mycorrhiza. Other tropical
leguminous plants growing in similar soils also exhibited the
mycorrhizal association. So did several species of clover collected
in France and Great Britain. These results at once suggested the
reason why san hemp, lucerne, and many other tropical legumes

“respond so strikingly to cattle manure. They must all be mycor-
rhiza-formers.

The fact that leguminous plants and grasses respond to the
same factors and that the former group are mycorrhiza-formers
suggested that this association would also be found in the grasses.
Sugar-cane was first investigated. It proved to be a mycorrhiza-
forrher. The grasses of the meadows and pastures of France and
Great Britain were then studied. The herbage of the celebrated
méadows of La Crau, between Salon and Arles in Provence, was
examined for mycorrhiza in 1938 and again in 1939. In both
seasoris the roots of the grasses were found to be infected with
mycorrhiza. Dr. Levisohn’s report on the samples collected in
July 1939 reads as follows: ‘Sporadic but deep infection of the long
and short roots: coarse mycelium inter- and intra-cellular: diges-
tion stages: the products of digestion seem to be translocated
rapidly.’ In the material from La Crau examined in 1939 the,
most remarkable example ofthe mycorrhizal relationship occurred
in a species of Taraxacum which formed at least a quarter of the
herbage. Here the infection of the inner layers of the long and
short roots was ‘very widespread and deep. The mycelium is of
large diameter, thin-walled with granular contents. Distribution
mainly intra-cellular. Digestion showing all stages of disintegra-

[PAG 118]
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE INDORE PROCESS . 99

tion. Root hairs sparsely formed. The mycorrhizal regions of the
roots are indicated macroscopically by beading, greater opacity,
and slight yellowing of the infected zones’ (Levisohn). This sug-
gests that some or all of the so-called weeds of grass-land may well
play an important role in the transmission of quality from soil to
plant and in the nutrition of the animal. Samples of the turf from
two well-known farms in England—Mr. Hosier’s land in Wiltshire .
and Mr. William Kilvert’s pastures in Corve Dale in Shropshire—
were then examined. They gave similar results to those of La Crau.
Clearly the grass family, like the clover group, are mycorrhiza- °
formers, a fact which at once explains why both these classes of
plants respond so-markedly. to humus.

This independent approach to: the grass-land problems of
countries like Great Britain has brought out new principles.
Grasses and clovers fall into one group as regards nutrition and
not, as hitherto thought, into two groups. Both require the same
things—humus and soil aeration. Both are connected with the
organic matter in the soil by a living fungous bridge which pro-
vides the key to their correct nutrition and therefore to the manage-
- ment of grassland. If this view is a sound one it follows that any
- agency which will increase the natural formation of humus under
. the turf of our grass-lands will be followed by an improvement in
the herbage and by an increase in their stock-carrying capacity.
The methods which increase humus formation in the soil must
now be considered. The following may be mentioned:

1. The bail system. The most spectacular example of humus
manufacture in the soil underneath a pasture is that to be seen on
Mr. Hosier’s land on the downs near Marlborough. By a stroke
of the pen, as it were, he abolished the farm-yard, the cowshed,
and the dung-cart in order to counter the fall in prices which
followed the Great War. He reacted to adversity in the correct
manner: he found it a valuable stimulant in breaking new ground.
The cows were fed and made to live out of doors. They were
milked in movable bails. Their urine and dung were systematically
distributed at little cost over these derelict pastures. The vege-
table residues ofthe herbage came in contact with urine, dung,
air, water, and bases. The stage was set for the Indore Process.
Mr. Hosier’s invisible labour force came into action: the micro-

[PAG 119]
100 THE INDORE PROCESS ~

organisms in the soil’ manufactured a sheet of humus all over the
downs: the earthworms distributed it. The roots of the grasses and
clovers were soon geared up with this humus by means of the
mycorrhizal association. The herbage improved; the stock-carry-
ing capacity of the fields went up by leaps and bounds. Soil
fertility accumulated ; every five years or so it was cashed in by two
or three straw crops; another period under grass followed, and so
on. Incidentally the health of the animals also benefited; the
prognostications of the neighbourhood (when this audacious
innovation started) that the cows and heifers would soon ‘perish
through tuberculosis and other diseases-have not been fulfilled."
2. The use of basic slag. On many of the heavy soils under grass
the limiting factor in humus production is not urine but oxygen.
Everything except air is there in abundance for making humus—
vegetable and animal wastes as well as moisture. Under such
turf the land always suffers from asphyxiation. ‘The soil dies.
This is indicated by the absence of nitrates under such turf. About
fifty years ago it was discovered that such pastures could be im-
proved by dressings of basic slag. As this material contains phos-
phate, and asits use stimulates the clovers, it was assumed that these -
soils suffered from phosphatic depletion as a result of feeding a
constant succession of live stock, each generation of which removes
+so many pounds of phosphate in ‘their bones. When, however, we
examine the turf of a slagged pasture we find that humus formation
« has taken place. If the application of slag is repeated on these
heavy lands after an interval of five or six years there is often no
further response. When we apply basic slag to pastures on the
chalk there is no result. There is phosphate depletion on strong
Jands only at one point; none at all on light chalk downs. These
results do not hold together; indeed they contradict one another.
Are we really dealing with phosphate deficiency’ in these lands?
May not the humus formed after slag is added explain the perma-
nent benefit of this manuring? May it not prove that the effect of
slag on heavy soils has been in the first instance a physical one
which has improved the aeration, reduced the acidity, and so

* * Mr. Hosier has done more than solve a local problem and provide evidencé in
support of a new theory. His work has drawn attention to the potential value of our
downlands—areas which in Roman and Saxon times supported a large proportion of
.the population of Great Britain.

[PAG 120]
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 101

helped humus manufacture to start? We can begin to answer :
these: questions by studying what happens when the aeration of
heavy grass-land ig improved, by an alternative method—sub-
soiling.

3. Sub-soiling. The effect of sub-soiling heavy grass-lands was
described by Sir Bernard Greenwell, Bt. in a paper read to the
Farmers’ Club on January goth, 1939, in the following words:

‘Taking our grass-land first, probably more can be done by proper
mechanical treatment followed by intensive stocking than by artificial
manuring. Some people are suggesting that we should plough up a
lot of our second-rate pasture land and re-sow it, but this I have found
is very speculative as the cost is in the neighbourhood of £3 to £5 an
acre and the results are bound to be uncertain. By cleaning out ditches,
reopening drains and by mole draining, however, a lot can be done.
I have also found that by using a Ransome mole plough or sub-soiler
of the wheel type, pulled through the land at a depth of 12 inches to
14 inches, 4 feet apart, one can produce much better grass, and this is
proved by the greatest expert of all—the animal. In a field which was
partly sub-soiled we found that this sub-soiled part was grazed hard by
the cattle, and the part that was not treated in this way was only
lightly picked over. The cost of this is about 2s. 64. per acre without
overheads and lost time. We reckon £1 a day for a 40-h.p. tractor,
including labour, depreciation, &c., and a tractor will do g to 10
acres a day ’sub-soiling at 4 feet intervals.’

Poor aeration was obviously the limiting factor at Marden Park.
Once this was removed humus formation started and the herbage
improved. It will be interesting to watch the results of the next
stage of this work. Half ofa sub-soiled field has been dressed with
basic slag and the reaction of the animals is being watched. If
they graze the field equally, basic slag is probably having no effect:
ifthe animals prefer the slagged half then this manure is required.!

4. The cultivation of grass-land. One of the recommendations of
the Welsh Plant Breeding Station is the partial or complete cultiva-
tion of grass-land, Partial cultivation is done from the surface by
various types of harrow:-complete cultivation by the plough. In

* The Marden Park results suggest a further question. Will sub-soiling at 2s. 6d.
an acre replace the ploughing-up campaign recently launched by the Ministry of
Agriculture for which the State pays £2 an acre? If, as seems likely, the basic slag and
ploughing-up subsidies are both unnecessary, a large sum cf moncy will be available

for increasing the humus of the soils of Great Britain, the need for which requires no
argument. 2

[PAG 121]
102 THE INDORE PROCESS

both cases aeration is improved; the production of humus is
stimulated; generally speaking the result obtained is in direct
proportion to the degree of cultivation; ploughing up and re- ©
seeding is far better for the grass than mere scarification with
harrows. In this work we must carefully distinguish the means
and the end. The agency is some form of cultivation; the conse-
quence is always the manufacture of humus.

It will be evident that the various methods by which humus is
manufactured under the growing turf itself or by ploughing up
and rotting the old turf agree in all respects with what is to be
learned-from the grasses and the legumes of the tropics. Sir George
Stapledon’s advice as regards Great Britain is supported by the
age-long experience of the agriculture of the East. No stronger
backing than this is possible. There is only one grass-land problem
in the world. It is a simple one. The soil must be brought back to

. active life. The micro-organisms and earthworms must be supplied
with freshly made humus and with air. Varieties of grasses and
legumes which respond to improved soil conditions must then be
provided. In this way only can the farmers of Great Britain make
the most of our green carpet. Our grass-lands will then be able

‘to do what Nature does in the forest—manure themselves.

The order in which improvements should be introduced in
grass-land management is important. Soil fertility must first ‘be
increased so that the grasses and clovers can fully express themselves.
Improved varieties should then be selected to suit the new soil
conditions. If we study the variety by itself without any reference
to the soil and develop higher yielding strains of grasses and
clovers for the land as it is now, there is a danger, indeed almost a
certainty, that the farmer will be furnished with yet another
means of exhausting his soil. The new varieties will have a short
life: they will prove to be a boomerang: the last state of the farm
will be worse than the first. If, however, the soil conditions are
first improved and the system of farming is such that soil fertility
is maintained, the plant breeder will be provided with a safe field
for his activities. His work will then have a permanent value.

How are we to test the fertility of grass-land? Mr. Hosier has
supplied the answer. Grass-land can be. tested for fertility by
means of a complete artificial manure. If the soil is really fertile,

[PAG 122]
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 103
such a dressing will give no result, because no limiting factor in

the shape of shortage of nitrogen, phosphorus, or potash exists. _

Mr. Hosier has summed up his experience of this matter in a letter
dated Marlborough, April 6th, 1938, a3 follows:

‘On my improved grass-land, I have on several occasions put down
experimental plots of artificial manures and there was no response even
where there was a complete fertilizer applied. Before I started open-air
dairying on a big scale in 1924, I put down 150 plots and in many
places I could write my name with artificials.’

The value of this experience does not end with the testing of
soil fertility. It indicates the very high proportion of the grass-
lands of western Europe which are infertile and which need large
volumes of humus to restore their fertility. Most of the fields under
grass will respond to artificials. All these are infertile.

The consequences of the improvement of grass-land in a country
like Great Britain can now be summarized. The land will carry
more live stock. The surplus summer grass can be dried for winter
feeding. The stored fertility in the pastures can be cashed in at
any time in the form of wheat or other cereals. A valuable food
reserve in time of war will always be available. As Mr. Hosier has
shown, there will be no damage from wireworms when such
fertile pastures are broken up and sown with wheat.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

GREENWELL, Sir BERNARD, ‘Soil Fertility: The Farm’s Capital’, Journal of the Farmers’
Club, 1939, p. t.

Hoster, A. J. ‘Open-air Dairying’, Journal of «he Farmers’ Club, 1927, p. 103.

Howarp, A. ont Production in India: A Critical Survey of its Problems, Oxford University
Press, 1

STAPIEDONI Ri G. The Land, Now and To-morrow, London, 1935.

[PAG 123]
CHAPTER VIII
DEVELOPMENTS’ OF: THE .INDORE PROCESS

THE UTILIZATION OF TOWN WASTES

human population, for the most part concentrated in
towns and villages, is maintained almost exclusively by the
land. Apart from the harvest of the sea, agriculture provides the
food of the people and the requirements of vegetable and animal
origin needed by the factories of the urban areas. It follows that a
large portion of the waste products of farming must’ be found in
the towns and away from the fields which produced them. One
of the consequences, therefore, of the concentration of the human
population in small areas has been to separate, often by consider-
able distances, an important portion of the wastes of agriculture

from the land. These wastes fall into two distinct groups:

(2) Town wastes consisting mainly of the contents of the dust-
bins, market, street, and trade wastes with a small amount
of animal manure.

(5) The urine and faeces of the population.

In practically all cases in this country both groups of waste
materials are treated as something to be got rid of as quickly, as

unostentatiously, and as cheaply as possible. In Great Britain ©’

most town wastes are either buried in a controlled tip.or ‘burnt in
an incinerator. Practically none of our urban waste finds its way
back to the land. The wastes of the population, in most Western
countries, are first diluted with large volumes of water and then
after varying amounts of purification,“aré discharged either into
rivers or into the sea. Beyond a little of the resulting sewage sludge
the residues of the population are entirely lost to agriculture.

From the point of view of farming the towns have become para-
sites. They will last under the present system only as long as the
_earth’s fertility lasts. Then the whole fabric of our civilization
must collapse.

In considering how this unsatisfactory state of affairs can be
remedied and how the wastes of urban areas’ can be restored to
the soil, the magnitude of the problem and the difficulties which

[PAG 124]
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 105

have to be overcome must be realized from the outset. These
difficulties are of two kinds: those which belong to the subject
proper, and those inherent in.ourselves. The present system of
sewage disposal has been the growth of a hundred years; problem
after problem has had to be solved as it arose from the sole point
of view of what seemed best for the town at the moment; mother
earth has had few. or no representatives on municipal councils to
plead her cause; the disposal of waste has always been looked upon
as the sole business of the town rather than something which con-
cerns the well-being of the nation as a whole. The fragmentation
of the subject into its urban components—medical, enginecring,
administrative, and financial—has followed; direction has been
lost. The piecemeal consideration of such a matter could only
lead to failure. ‘

Can anything be done at this late hour by way of reform? Can
mother earth secure even a partial restitution of her manurial
rights? If the easiest road is first taken a great deal can be
accomplished in a few years. The problem of getting the town
wastes back into the land is not difficult. The task ofdemonstrating
a working alternative to water-borne sewage and getting it adopted
in practice is, however, stupendous. At the moment it is altogether
outside the bounds of practical politics. Some catastrophe, such
as a universal shortage of food followed by famine, or the nccessity
‘ of spreading the urban population about the country-side to safe-

guard it from direct and indirect damage by hostile aircraft, will
have to be upon us before such a question can even be considered.

The effective disposal of town wastes is, however, far less diffi-
cult, as will be seen by what has already been accomplished in this
country. Passing over the earlier experiments with town wastes,
summed up in a recent publication of the Ministry of Agriculture,!
in which the dustbin refuse was used without modification, the
recent results obtained with pulverized wastes, prepared by passing
the sorted material (to remove tin cans, bottles, and other refrac-
tory objects) through a hammer mill, point clearly to the true role
of this matcrial in agriculture. Its valuc lies, not in its chemical
composition, which is almost negligible, but in the fact that_it is

* Mantres and Afanuring, Bulletin 36, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, H.M.
Stationery Office, 1937.

[PAG 125]
106 ” THE INDORE PROCESS

a perfect diluent for the manure heap, the weakest link in agricul--
ture in many countries. The ordinary manure heap on a farm is
biologically unbalanced and chemically unstable. Itis unbalanced
because the micro-organisms which are trying to synthesize humus
have far too much urine and dung and far too little cellulose’ and
lignin and insufficient air to begin with. It is unstable because it
cannot hold itself together; the valuable nitrogen is lost either as
ammonia or as free nitrogen; the micro-organisms cannot use up
the urine fast enough before it runs to waste; the proteins-are used
as a source of oxygen with the liberation of free nitrogen. The
fungi and bacteria of the manure heap are working under impos-
sible conditions. They live a life of constant frustration which can
only be avoided by giving them a balanced ration. This can be
achieved by diluting the existing manure heaps with three volumes,
of pulverized town wastes. The micro-organisms are then ‘pro-
vided with all the cellulose and lignin they need. The dilution
of the manure heap automatically improves the aeration. The
volume of the resulting manure is multiplied by at least three; its
efficiency is also increased. ;

Such a reform of the manure heap is practicable. Two examples
may be quoted. At the large hop garden at Bodiam in Sussex, the
property of Messrs. Arthur Guinness, Son & Co., Ltd., over g0
tons of pulverized town wastes from Southwark are used daily
throughout the year for humus manufacture. This material is
railed in 6-ton truck-loads to Bodiam, transferred to the hop
gardens by lorry and then composted with all the wastes of the
garden—hop bine, hop string, hedge and roadside trimmings, old
straw, all the farm-yard manure which is available—and every
other vegetable and animal waste that can be collected locally.
The annual output of finished humus is over 10,000 tons, which is
prepared at an all-in cost of ros. a ton, including spreading on the
land. The Manager of this garden, Mr. L. P. Haynes, has worked
out comparative figures of cost between nitrogen, phosphorus, and
potash applied in the form of humus or artificials, The cost of -
town wastes for Bodiam is 4s. 6d. a ton; lorry transport from rail
to garden gs. a ton; assembling and turning the compost heaps
and spreading on the land 25. 64. a ton. The analysis of this humus
was: 0-96 per cent. nitrogen, 2-45 per cent. phosphate, and. 0-62

[PAG 126]
“

DEVELOPMENTS OF THE INDORE PROCESS - 107
per cent. potash. Sixteen tons of humus therefore contain 344 Ib.

.of nitrogen, 769 lb. of P,O,, and 222 lb. of K,O. The cost of this

at tos. a ton including spreading comes to £8 an acre. Thè pur-
chase, haulage, and sowing of these amounts of NPK in the form
of sulphate of ammonia, basic slag, and muriate of potash comes
to £9. 125. 74d. There is therefore a distinct saving when humus
is used. ‘This, however, is only a minor item on the credit side.
The texture of the soil is rapidly improving, soil fertility is being
built up, the need for chemical manures and poison sprays to
control pests is becoming less.

The manurial policy adopted on this hop garden has been con--
firmed in rather an interesting fashion. Before a serious attempt
was made to prepare humus on the present scale, a small amount
of pulverized Southwark refuse had been in use. The bulk of the
manure used, however, was artificials supplemented by the various
organic manures and fertilizers on the market. The labourers
employed at Bodiam were therefore conversant with practically

. every type of inorganic and organic manure. One of their privi-

leges is a supply of manure for their gardens. They have always
selected pulverized town wastes because they consider this grows
the best vegetables.

A second large-scale demonstration of the benefits which follow
the reform of the manure heap has been carried out at Marden
Park in Surrey. Many thousands of tons of humus have been
made by composting pulverized town wastes with ordinary dung.
In a paper read to the Farmers’ Club on January goth, 1939,
Sir Bernard Greenwell refers to these results as follows: ‘I have
only two years’ experience of this myself, but from the results I
have seen we can multiply our dung by four and get crops as good
as if thé land had been manured with pure dung.’ In 1938 I saw
some of this work. Many of the fields on the estate had been
divided into half, one portion being manured with humus and the
other with an equal number of cartloads of dung. I inspected a’
number of these fields just as the corn was coming into ear. In
every case the crops grown with humus—wheat, beans, oats,
clover, and so forth—were definitely better than those raised
with farm-yard manure. These results showed that this land
wants freshly prepared humus, not so many Ib. to the acre of

[PAG 127]
108 THE INDORE PROCESS
this and that. In manuring we are nourishing a complex bio-
logical system not ministering to the needs of a : conveyor belt in a
factory.

Once the correct use of Southwark wastes was demonstrated a
demand for this material arose. The sales increased; the demand
now exceeds the supply. The details are given in Table 7.

TABLE 7
Sales of crushed wastes at Southwark
Tons crushed* Tons sold

Year T. GQ T. G Income from sales

tons, cwt. tons. cwt. £ os. d.

1933-4 - . . 18,643 12 7971 9 653 9 9
1934-5 . . - 18,620 1 6,341 9 482 2 7
1935-6 . . . 19,153 14 9,878 5 1,001 Ir I
1936-7... . . 18,356 13 12,760 15, 1,845 6 B
1937-8 . . . 18,545 15 © 15,391 8 2,306 13 7
1938-9 - . . 17,966 3 17,052 I 2,715 14 8

* A certain amount of these wastes is required by the Depot itself for sealing one of
its own tips; so it is not possible to sell all the waste crushed to farmers.

When it is remembered. that the annual dustbin refuse in Great
Britain is in the neighbourhood of 13,000,000 tons and that about
half of this material can be used for making the most of the urine
and dung of our live stock, it will be evident what enormous possi-
bilities exist for raising the fertility of the zones of land within, say,
fifty miles of the large cities and towns. A perusal of the Public
Cleansing Return for the year ending March gist, 1938, published
by the Ministry of Health, shows that a certain proportion of this
dustbin refuse is still.burnt in incinerators. Once, however, the
agricultural value of this miaterial is realized by farmers and
market gardeners it will not be long before incineration’ is given
up and the whole of the organic matter in our “town wastes finds
its way into the manure heap. When this time comes the utiliza-
tion of the enormous dumps of similar wastes, which accumulated
before controlled tipping was adopted, can be taken in hand.
These contain many more millions of tons of material which can
be dealt with on Southwark lines. In this way the manure heaps *
of a very large portion of rural England can be reformed and the
fertility of a considerable area restored. A good beginning will -

[PAG 128]
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 109

then have been made in the .restitution of the manurial rights
owing to the country-side. The towns will have begun to repay
their debt to the soil.

Besides the wastes of the dustbins and the dumps there is another
“and even more important source of unused humus in the neigh-
bourhood of our cities and towns. This occurs in the controlled
tips in which most of the dustbin refuse is now buried. In con-
trolled tipping the town wastes are deposited in suitable areas
near cities and sealed with a layer of clay, soil, or ashes so as to
prevent nuisance generally and also the breeding of flies. The
seal, however, permits sufficient aeration for the first stage in the |
conversion of most of the organic matter into humus. The result
is that in a year or two the tip becomes a humus mine. The crude
organic matter in these wastes is slowly transformed by means of
fungi and bacteria into humus. All that is needed is to separate
the finely divided humus from the refractory material and to
apply it to the land.

A very valuable piece of research work on this matter has re-
cently been undertaken at Manchester. The results are described
by Messrs. Jones and Owen in Some Notes on the Scientific Aspects of
Controlled Tipping, published by the City of Manchester. The main
object of the work was to establish the facts underlying con-
trolled tipping so that any discussion on the efficacy of this process,
as.compared with incineration, could be conducted on the basis
of carefully ascertained knowledge. The investigation, however, is
invaluable from the agricultural standpoint. The experiments
were begun in August 1932 at Wythenshawe in a controlled tip
ona piece of low-lying marshy ground subject to periodic flooding
from the adjacent river Mersey. One of the subsidiary objects of
the tipping was to reclaim the land for recreational or other uses
in the future. Six experimental plots were selected for the tests,
each approximately 16 feet by 12 fect. The material contained in
the tip was ordinary dustbin refuse tipped to a depth of 6 feet.
The first object was to ascertain the consequences of bacterial

action on the organic matter in the interior of the tip, such as the
generation of temperature, the biological as well as the chemical
changes, and any alteration in the gascous atmosphere in the
interior of the mass. Having disposed of these preliminary matters,

[PAG 129]
110 THE INDORE PROCESS

it was proposed to attack the main problem and to answer the :
question: Is controlled tipping safe?

Careful attention was first given to the seal. The surface of the
plots was covered with a layer of fine dust and ashes, of a minimum
thickness of 6 inches, obtained by passing household refuse over
a $ inch mesh. Such a seal, which contained about 2°5 per cent.
of organic mattér, proved to be a suitable mechanical covering
and also prevented the breeding of flies. The sides and ends of the
experimental plots were covered with clay well tamped down. The
plots therefore behaved as if they were large flowerpots in direct
contact with the moist earth below but separated from the outer
atmosphere by a permeable seal of screened dust and fine ashes,

The unsorted household refuse under experiment represented
an average sample and contained about 42 per cent. of organic
matter, the remaining 58 per cent. being composed of inorganic
materials. After tipping and sealing, there was a rapid rise of
temperature, irrespective of the season, to a maximum of 160° F.
towards the end of the first week. This was caused by the activities
of the thermogenic and thermophyllic members of the aerobic
group of bacteria which break down cellulose, liberate heat, and
- produce large volumes of carbon dioxide. At the same time these
organisms rapidly multiply and in so doing synthesize large *
amounts of protein from the mixed wastes. This on the death of
the organisms forms a valuable constituent of the humus left when
the bacterial activities die down after about fifteen wecks, as is
indicated by the return of the temperature of the tip to normal.
The controlled tip therefore behaves very much like an Indore
compost heap.

As would be expected from the heterogencous nature and uneven
distribution of the contents of the tip, considerable variations were
shown in the maximum temperatures attained. During,the period
of fermentation the bacterial flora (at first aerobic) use and reduce
the oxygen content of the tip, and so pave the way for the faculta-
tive anaerobic organisms which complete the conversion of the
organic matter into humus.