=== An Agricultural Testament - Albert Howard.pdf — CHUNK 2/14 ===
Chars: 44,680 | Offset: 43,278



[PAG 29]
14 . . INTRODUCTION
milk.! Nevertheless, the waste products of the animal, as is often
the case in other parts of the world, are not always fully utilized
for the land. The Chinese have for ages-past recognized the
importance of the urine of animals and the great value of animal
wastes.in the preparation of cémposts. In India far less attention
is paid to these wastes and a large portion of the cattle dung avail-
able is burnt for fuel. On the other hand, in most Oriental coun-
tries human wastes find their way back to the land. In China
these are collected for manuring the crops direct. In India they
are concentrated on the zone of highly manured land immediately
round each village. If the population or a portion of it could be
persuaded to use a more distant zone for a few years, the area of
village lands under intensive agriculture could at least be doubled.
Here is an opportunity for the new system of government in India
to raise production without the expenditure of a single rupee. In
India there are’ 500,000 villages each of which is surrounded by
a zone of very fertile land which is constantly being over-manured
by the habits of the people. If we examjne the crops grown on this
land we find that the yields are high and the plants are remarkably
free from disease. Although half a million examples of the con-
nexion between a fertile soil and a healthy plant exist in India
alone, and these natural experiments have been in operation for
centuries before experiment stations like Rothamsted were ever
thought of, modern agricultural science takes no notice of the
results and resolutely refuses to accept them as evidence, largely
because they lack the support furnished by the higher mathe-

4

matics. They also dispose of one of the ideas of the disciples of :

“Rudolph Steiner, who argue that the use of human wastes in
‘ agriculture is harmful. i .
Leguminous plants are common. Although it was not till 1888,
after a protracted controversy lasting thirty years, that Western,
science finally accepted as proved the important part played by
pulse crops in enriching the soil, centuries of experience had

1 "The buffalo is the milch cow of the Orient and is capable not only of useful labour
in the cultivation of rice, but also of living and producing lasge quantities af rich milk
on a diet on which the best dairy cows of Europe and America would starve, The
acclimatization of the Indian buffalo in the villages of the Tropics—Africa, Central
America, the West Indies in pasticular—would do much to improve the fertility of
-the soil and the nutrition of the people.

[PAG 30]
INTRODUCTION 15

taught the peasants of the East the same lesson. The leguminous
crop in the rotation is everywhere one of their old fixed practices.
In some areas, such as the Indo-Gangetic plain, one of these
pulses—the pigeon pea—is also made use of as a subsoil cultivator.
The deep spreading root system is used to promote the aeration
of the closely packed silt soils, which so closely resemble those of
the Holland Division of Lincolnshire in Great Britain.
Cultivation is gerierally superficial and is carried out by wooden
ploughs furnished with an iron point. Soil-inverting ploughs, as
used in the West for the destruction of weeds, have never been
designed by Eastern peoples. The reasons for this appear to be
two: (1) soil inversion for the destruction of weeds is not necessary
in a hot climate where the same work is done by the sun for
nothing; (2) the preservation of the level of the fields is essential
for surface drainage, for preventing local waterlogging, and for
irrigation. Another reason for this surface cultivation has recently
been pointed out (p. 210). The store of nitrogen in the soil in the
form of organic matter has to be carefully conserved: it is part
of the cultivator’s working capital. Too much cultivation and
deep ploughing would oxidize this reserve and the balance of soil
fertility would soon be destroyed.--
Rice is grown whenever possible. By far the most important
- crop in the East is rice. In India, as has already been pointed out,
the production of rice exceeds that of any two food crops put
‘together. Whenever the soil and water supply permit, rice is
invariably grown. A study of this crop is illuminating. At first
sight rice appears to contradict one of the great principles of the
agricultural science of the Occident, namely, the dependence of
cereals on nitrogenous manures. Large crops of rice are produced
in many parts of India on the same land year after year without
the addition of any manure whatever. The rice fields of the
country export paddy in large quantities to the centres of popula-
tion or abroad, but there is no corresponding import of combined
nitrogen.’ Where does the rice crop obtain its nitrogen? One
* Taking Burma as an example of an area exporting rice beyond seas, during the
twenty years ending 1924, about 25,000,000 tons of paddy have been exported from
a tract roughly 10,000,000 acres in arca. As unhusked rice contains about 1-2 per

cent, of nitrogen.the amount of this element, shipped overseas during twenty years or
destroyed in the burning of the husk, is in the neighbourhood of 300,000 tons. As

[PAG 31]
16 INTRODUCTION '

source in all probability is fixation from the atmosphere in the
submerged algal film on the surface of the mud. Another is the’
rice nursery itself, where the seedlings are raised on land heavily
manured with cattle dung. Large quantities of nitrogen and other
nutrients are’stored in the scedling itself; this at transplanting time
contains a veritable arsenal of reserves of all-kinds which carry the
plant successfully through this process and probably also furnish
some of the nitrogen needed during subsequent growth. The -
manuring of the rice seedling illustrates a very general principle
in agriculture, namely, the importance of starting a crop in a
really fertile soil and so arranging matters that ‘the plant can
absorb a great deal of what it needs as early as possible in its
development.

There is an adequate supply of labour. ‘Labour is everywhere
abundant, as would naturally follow from the great density of the
rural population. Indeed, in India it is so great that if the leisure

‘ time of the cultivators and their cattle for a single year could be

- calculated as money at the local rates a perfectly colossal figure
would be obtained. This leisure, however, is not altogether wasted.
It enables the cultivators and their oxen to recover from the -
periods of intensive work which precede the sowing of the crops
and which are needed at harvest time. At these periods time is
everything: everybody works from sunrise to sunset. The prepara-
tion of the land and the sowing of the crops need the greatest care
and skill; the work must be completed in a very short time so that’
a large labour force is essential.

It will be observed that in this peasant agriculture the great
pressure of population on the soil results in poverty, most marked
where, as in India, extensive methods are used on small-holdings

. which really need intensive farming. It is amazing that in spite
. of this unfavourable factor soil fertility should have been preserved ..

for centuries: this is because natural means have been used and

not artificial manures. The crops are able to withstand the

this constant drain of nitrogen is net made up for by the import of manure, we should
expéct to find a gradual.loss of fertility. Nevertheless, this does not take place either
in Burma or in Bengal, where rice has been grown on the same land year After year
for centuries, Clearly the soil must obtain fresh supplies of nitrogen from somewhere,
otherwise the crop would cease to grow. The only likely source is fixation from the
atmosphere, probably in the submerged algal film on the surface of the mud. This
is one of the problems of tropical agriculture which is now being investigated. -

[PAG 32]
INTRODUCTION 17

inroads of insects and fungi without a thin film of protective
poison.

THE AGRICULTURAL METHODS OF THE OCCIDENT
If we take a wide survey ofthe contribution which is being made

by the fields of the West, we find that they are engaged in trying

to satisfy no less than three hungers: (1) the local hunger of the

- rural population, including the live stock; (2) the hunger of the

growing urban areas, the population of which is unproductive
from the point of view of soil fertility; and (3) the hunger of the
machine avid for a constant stream of the raw materials required
for manufacture. The urban population during the last century
has grown out of all knowledge; the needs of the machine increase
as it becomes more and more efficient; falling profits are met by
increasing the output of manufactured articles. All this adds to
the burden on the land and to the calls on its fertility. It will not
be without interest to analyse critically the agriculture of the West
and see how it is fitting itself for its growing task. This can be
done by examining its main characteristics. These are as follows:

The holding tends to increase in size. There is a great variation
in the size of the agricultural holdings of the, West from the small
family units of France and Switzerland to the immense collective
farms of Russia and the spacious ranches of the United States and
Argentina. Side by side with this growth in the size of the farm is
the diminution of the number of men per square mile. In Canada,
for example, the number of workers per 1,000 acres of cropped
land fell from ‘26 in 1911 to 16 in 1926. Since these data were
published the size of the working population has shrunk still
further. This state of things has arisen from the scarcity and dear-
ness of labour which has naturally led to the study of labour-saving
devices.

Monoculture is the rule. Almost everywhere crops are grown

-in pure culture. Except in temporary leys, mixed crops are rare.

On the rich prairie lands of North America even rotations arc
unknown: crops of wheat follow one another and no attempt is
made to convert the straw into humus by means of the urine and
dung of cattle. The straw is a tiresome encumbrance and is burnt
off annually.

c

[PAG 33]
18 INTRODUCTION -

The machine is rapidly replacing ‘the animal. Increasing
“mechanization is one of the main features of Western agriculture. -
Whenever a machine can be invented which saves human or.
animal labour its spread is rapid. -Engines and motors of various
kinds are the rule everywhere. The electrification of agriculture
is beginning. The inevitable march of the combine harvester in
all the wheat-producing areas of the world is one of the latest
examples of the mechanization of the agriculture of the West.
“Cultivation tends to be quicker and deeper. There is a growing
. feeling that the more and the deeper the soil is stirred the better

will be the crop. The invention of the gyrotiller, a heavy and expen-
sive soil churn, is one of the answers to this demand. The slaves.
of the Roman Empire have been replaced by mechanical slaves.
The replacement of the horse and the ox by the internal combustion
engine and the electric motor is, however, attended by one great
disadvantage. These machines do not void urine and dung and so
contribute nothing to the maintenance of soil fertility.. In this
sense the slaves of Western agriculture are less efficient than those
of ancient Rome.

Artificial manures are widely used. The feature of the manuring
of the West is the use of artificial manures. The factories engaged
during the Great War in the.fixation of atmospheric nitrogen for
the manufacture of explosives had to find other markets, the use
of nitrogenous fertilizers in agriculture increased, until to-day the
majority of farmers and market gardeners base their manurial
programme on the cheapest forms of nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P),
and potassium (K) on the market. What may be conveniently
described as the NPK mentality, dominates farming alike in the
experimental stations and the country-side. Vested interests,
entrenched in time of national emergency, have gained a strangle-
hold.

Artificial manures ‘involve less labour and less trouble than
farm-yard manure. The tractor is superior to the horse in power .
and in speed of work: it needs no fod and no expensive care
during its long hours: of rest. These two agencies have made it
easier to run a farm. A satisfactory profit and loss account has

- been obtained. For the moment farming has been made to pay.
But there is another side to this picture. These chemicals and these

[PAG 34]
INTRODUCTION : 49

machines can do nothing to keep the soil in good heart. By their
use the processes of growth can never be balanced by the processes
“of decay: All that they can accomplish is the transfer of the soil’s
capital to current account. That this is so will be much clearer
when the attempts now being made to farm without any animals
- at all march to their inevitable failure.

Diseases are on the increase. With the spread of artificials and
the exhaustion of the original supplies of humus, carried by every
fertile soil, there has been a corresponding increase in the diseases
of crops and of the animals which feed on them. If the spread of
foot-and-mouth disease in Europe and its comparative insigni-
ficance among well fed animals in the East are compared, or if the

. comparison is made between certain areas in Europe, the conclu-
sion is inevitable that there must be an intimate connexion between
faulty methods of agriculture and anirnal disease. In crops like
potatoes and fruit, the use of the poison spray has closely followed
the reduction in the supplies of farm-yard manure and the diminu-
tion of fertility.

Food preservation processes are also on the increase. A feature
of the agriculture of the West is the development of food preserva-
tion processes by which the journey of products like meat, milk,
vegetables, and fruit between the soi] and the stomach is pro-
longed. This is done by freezing, by the use of carbon dioxide, by
drying, and by canning. Although food is preserved for a time in
this way, what is the effect of these processes on the health of the
community during a period of, say, twenty-five years? Is it pos-
sible to preserve the first freshness of food? If so then science will
have made a very real contribution.

Science has been called in to help production. Another of the
features of the agriculture of the West is the development of
agricultural science. Efforts have been made to enlist the help
_of a number of separate sciences in studying the problems of agri-
culture and in increasing the production of the soil. This has
entailed the foundation of numerous experiment stations which
every year pour out a large volume of advice in the shape of
printed matter.

These mushroom ideas of agriculture are failing; mother carth
deprived of her manurial rights is in revolt; the land is going on

[PAG 35]
20 ° INTRODUCTION

strike; the fertility of the soil is declining. An examination of the
areas which feed the population and the machines of a country
like Great Britain leaves no doubt that-the soil is no longer able to
stand the strain. Soil fertility is rapidly diminishing, particularly
in the United States, Canada, Africa, Australia, and New Zealand.
In Great Britain itself real farming has already been given up
‘ except on the best.lands. The loss of fertility all over the world is
indicated by the growing menace of soil erosion. The seriousness
of the situation is proved by the attention now being paid to this
matter in the press and by the various Administrations. In the
United States, for example, the whole resources of government are
being mobilized to save what is left of the good earth.

The agricultural record has been briefly reviewed from the
standpoint of soil fertility. The main characteristics of the various
methods of agriculture have been summarized. The most signi-
ficant of these are the operations of Nature as seen in the forest.
There the fullest use is made of sunlight and rainfall in raising
heavy crops of produce and at the same time not only maintaining
fertility but actually building up large reserves of humus. The
peasants of China, who pay great attention to the return of all
‘ wastes to the land, come nearest to the ideal set by Nature. They
have maintained a large population on the land without-any
falling off in fertility. The agriculture of ancient Rome failed
because it was unable to maintain the soil in a fertile condition.
The farmers of the West are repeating the mistakes made by
Imperial Rome. The soils of the Roman Empire, however, were
only called upon to assuage the hunger of a relatively small popula-
tion. The demands of the machine were then almost non-existent.
. In the West there are relatively more stomachs to fill while the
growing hunger of the machine is an additional burden on the
soil. The Roman Empire lasted for eleven centuries. How long
will the supremacy of the West endure? The answer depends on
the wisdom and courage of the population in dealing with the
things that matter. Can mankind regulate its affairs so that its
chief possession—the fertility of the soil—is preserved? On the
answer to this question the future of civilization depends.

[PAG 36]
INTRODUCTION 21

BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Agricultural Statistics of India, 1,.Delhi, 1938.

Howarp, A., and HowarD; G. Li: C. The Development of Indian Agriculture, Oxford
- University Press, 1929.
Kune, F.H. Farmers of Forty Centuries or Permanent Agriculture it in China, Korea, and Japan,
. London, 1926.
Liaanoron, Viscounr. Farine in England, London, 1938,
Mosnssen, Tuzopor. The History of Rome, transi. Dickson, London, 1894.
WreENCH, G. T. The Wheel of Hatt, London, 1938.

[PAG 37]
PARTI

THE PART PLAYED BY SOIL FERTILITY
IN AGRICULTURE

CHAPTER nu
THE NATURE OF SOIL FERTILITY

WET is this soil fertility? What exactly does it mean? How
does it affect the soil, the crop, and the animal? How can
we best investigate it? An attempt will be made in this chapter to
answer these questions and to show why soil fertility miust be the
basis of any permanent system of agriculture.

The nature of soil fertility can only be understood if it is con-
sidered in relation to Nature’s round. In this study we must at the
outset emancipate ourselves from the conventional approach to
agricultural problems by means of the separate sciences and above
ali from the statistical consideration of the evidence afforded by the

ordinary field experiment. Instead of breaking up the subject into”

fragments and studying agriculture in piecemeal fashion by the
analytical methods of science, appropriate only to the discovery
of new facts, we must adopt a synthetic approach and look at the
wheel of life as one great subject and not as if it were a patchwork
of unrelated things.

All the phases of the life cycle are closely connected; all are”

integral to Nature's activity; ‘all are equally important; none can
be omitted. We have therefore to study soil fertility in relation to
a natural working system and to adopt methods of investigation
in strict relation to such a subject. We need not strive after
quantitative results: the qualitative will often serve. We must
look at soil fertility as we would study a business where the profit
and loss Account must be taken along with the balance-sheet, the
standing ‘of the concern, and the method of management. It is
the ‘altogetherness’ which matters in business, not some particular
transaction or the profit or loss of the current year. So it is with
soil fertility. We have to consider the wood, nòt the individual
trees.

[PAG 38]
THE NATURE OF SOIL FERTILITY 23

The wheel of life is made up of two processes—growth and
decay. The one is'the counterpart of the other.

Let us first consider growth. The soil yields crops; these form
the food of animals: crops and animals are taken up into the
human body and are digested there. The perfectly grown, normal,
vigorous human being is the highest natural development known
to us. There is no break in the chain from soil to man; this section
of the wheel of life is uninterrupted throughout; it is also an
integration; each step depends on the last. It must therefore be
. studied as a working whole.

The energy for the machinery of growth is derived from the
sun; the chlorophyll in the green leaf is the mechanism by which
this energy is intercepted; the plant is thereby enabled to manu-
facture food—to synthesize carbohydrates and proteins from the
water and other substances taken up by the roots and the carbon
dioxide of the atmosphere. The efficiency of the green leaf is
therefore of supreme importance; on it depends the food supply
of this planet, our well-being, and our activities. There is no
alternative source of nutriment. Without sunlight and the green
leaf our industries, our trade, and our possessions would soon be
useless.

The chief factors on which the work of the green leaf depends
are the condition of the soil and its relation to the roots of the
plant. The plant and the soil come into gear by means of the root
system in two ways—by the root hairs and by the mycorrhizal
association. The first condition for this gearing is that the internal
surface of the soil—the pore space—shall be as large as possible
throughout the life of the crop. It is on the walls of this pore space,
which are covered with thin water films, that the essential activities
of the soil take place. The soil population, consisting mainly of
bacteria, fungi, and protozoa, carry on their life historics in these
water films.

The contact between the soil and the plant which is best under-
stood takes place by means of the root hairs. These are prolonga-
tions of the outer layer of cells of the young root. Their duty is to
absorb from the thin films of moisture on the walls of the pore

space the water and dissolved salts needed for the work of the
green leaves: no actual food can reach the plant in this way. only

[PAG 39]
24 SOIL FERTILITY IN AGRICULTURE i _

simple things which are needed by the green leaf to synthesize
food. The activities of the pore space depend on respiration for
which adequate quantities of oxygen are essential. A correspond-
ing amount of carbon dioxide is the natural by-product. To main-
tain the oxygen supply and to reduce the amount of carbon
dioxide, the pore spaces must be kept in contact with the atmo-
sphere. The soil must be ventilated. Hence the importance of
cultivation.

As most of the soil organisms possess no chlorophyll, and, more-
over, have to work in the dark, they must be supplied with energy.
This is obtained by the oxidation of: humus—the name given to
a complex residue of partly oxidized vegetable and animal matter
together with the substances synthesized by the ‘fungi and bacteria
which break down these wastes. This humus also helps to provide
the cement which enables the minute mineral soil particles_to
aggregate into larger compound particles and so maintain the -
pore space. If the soil is deficient in humus, the volume of the
pore space is reduced; the aeration of the soil is impeded; there is
insufficient organic matter for the soil population; the machinery

_ of the soil runs down; the supply of oxygen, water, and dissolved -
salts needed by the root hairs is reduced; the synthesis of carbo-
hydrates and proteins in the green leaf proceeds at a lower tempo; .
growth is affected. Humus is therefore an essential material for :
the soil'if the first phase of the life cycle is to function.”
© There is another reason why humus is important. Its presence .
in the soil is an essential condition for the proper functioning of ~
the second contact between soil and plant—the mycorrhizal
relationship. By means of this connexion certain soil fungi, which
live on humus, are able to invade the living cells of the young
roots and establish an intimate relation with the plant, the details
of which symbiosis are still being investigated and discussed. Soil
fungus and plant cells live together in closer partnership than the
algal and fungous constituents of the lichen do. How the fungus .
benefits has yet to be determined. How the plant profits is easier
to understand. Ifa suitable preparation of such roots is examined
under the microscope, all stages in the digestion of thé fungous
mycelium can be seen. At the end of the partnership the root
consumes the fungus and in this manner is able to absorb the

[PAG 40]
THE NATURE OF SOIL FERTILITY 25

carbohydrates and proteins which the fungus obtains partly from

the humus in the soil. The mycorrhizal association therefore is

- the living bridge by which a fertile soil (one rich in humus) and
the crop are directly connected and by which food materials ready
for immediate use can be transferred from soil to plant. How this
association influences the work of the green leaf is one of the most
interesting problems science has now to investigate. Is the effective
synthesis of carbohydrates and proteins in the green leaf dependent
on the digestion products of these soil fungi? . It is more than
probable that this must prove to be the case. Are these digestion
products at the root of disease resistance and quality? It would
appear so. If this is the case it would follow that on the efficiency

_ of this mycorrhizal association the health and well-being of man-
kind must depend. ”

In a fertile soil the soil and the plant come into gear in two ways
simultaneously. In establishing and maintaining these contacts
humus is essential. It is therefore a key material in the life cycle.
Without this substance the wheel of life cannot function effectively.

_The processes of decay which round off and complete the wheel
of life can be seen in operation on the floor of any woodland. This
has already been discussed (p. 2). It has been shown how the
mixed animal and vegetable wastes are converted into humus and
how the forest manures itself.

Such are the essential facts in the wheel of life. Growth on the
one side: decay on the other. In Nature’s farming a balance is

‘ struck and maintained between these two complementary pro-
cesses. The only man-made systems of agriculture—those to be
found in the East—which have stood the test of time have faith-
fully copied this rule in Nature. It follows therefore that the

° correct relation between the processes of growth and the processes
of decay is the-first principle of successful farming. Agriculture
must always be balanced. If we speed up growth we must ac-
celerate decay. If, on the other hand, the soil’s reserves are squan-
dered, crop production ceases to be good farming: it becomes
something very different. The farmer is transformed into a bandit.

It is now possible to define more clearly the meaning of soil
fertility. ‘It is the condition of a soil rich in humus in which the
growth processes proceed rapidly, smoothly, and efficiently. The

[PAG 41]
26 SOIL FERTILITY IN-AGRICULTURE

term therefore connotes such things as abundance, high quality,
. and resistance to disease. A soil which grows to perfection a wheat

crop—the food of man—is déscribed as fertile.. A-pasture on which :
meat and milk of the first class are produced falls into the same
‘category. An area under market-garden crops on which yegetables
of the highest quality are raised-has reached the peak as regards -
fertility.” °

Why does soil fertility so markedly influence the soil, the plant,
and the animal? By virtue of the humus it contains. The nature
and properties of this substance as well as the products of its -
decomposition are therefore important. These matters must now
be considered. ,

What is humus? A reply to this question has been rendered
easier by the appearance in 1938 of the second edition of Waks-
man’s admirable monograph on humus in which the results of no
less than 1311 original papers have been reduced to order.
Waksman defines humus as °

‘a complex aggregate of brown to dark-coloured amorphous substances,
which have originated during the decomposition of plant and animal .
residues by micro-organisms, under aerobic and anaerobic conditions,
usually in soils, composts, peat bogs, and water basins. Chemically, -
humus’ consists of various constituents of the original plant material
résistant to further decomposition; of substances undergoing decom-
position; of complexes resulting from decomposition either by pro-
cesses of hydrolysis or by oxidation and reduction; and of various
compounds synthesized by micro-organisms. Humus is a natural body; ©
itisa composite entity, just as are plant, animal, and microbial sub-
stances; it is even much more complex chemically, since all these
materials contribute to its formation. Humus possesses certain specific
physical, chemical, and biological properties which make it distinct
from other natural organic bodies. Humus, in itself or by interaction
with certain inorganic constituents of the soil, forms a complex colloidal
system, the different constituents of which are.held together by surface
forces; this system is adaptable to changing conditions of reaction,
moisture, and action by electrolytes. The numerous activities of the
soil micro-organisms take place in this system to a large extent.’

Viewed from the standpoint of chemistry and physics humus is
therefore not a simple substance: it is made up from a group of
very complex organic compounds depending on the nature of the
residues from which it is formed, on the conditions under which

[PAG 42]
THE NATURE OF SOIL FERTILITY ' 27:

decomposition takes place, and on the extent to which the pro-
cesses of decay have proceeded. Humus, therefore, cannot be
exactly the same thing everywhere. It is bound to be a creature
of circumstance. Moreover it is alive and teems with a vast range
of micro-organisms which derive most of their nutriment from this
substratum. Humus in the natural state is dynamic, not static.
From the point of view of agriculture, therefore, we are dealing
not with simple dead matter like a sack of sulphate of ammonia,
which can be analysed and valued according to its chemical
composition, but-with a vast organic complex in which an impor-
tant section of the farmer’s invisible labour force—the organisms
which carry on the work of the soil—is temporarily housed.
Humus, therefore, involves the element of labour; in this respect
also it is one of the most important factors on the farm.

It is essential at this point to pay some attention to the many-
sided properties of humus and to realize how profoundly it differs
from a chemical manure. At the moment all over the world field
trials—based on mere nitrogen content—are in progress for com-
paring, on the current crop, dressings of humus and various arti-
ficial manures. A mere glance at the properties of humus will
show that such field trials are based on a fundamental misconcep-
tion of what soil fertility implies and are misleading and therefore
useless. .

The properties of humus have been summed up by Waksman
as follows:

“1. Humus possesses a dark brown to black colour.

‘2. Humus is practically insoluble in water, although a part of it
may go-into colloidal solution in pure water. Humus dissolves to a
large extent in dilute alkali solutions, especially on boiling, giving a
dark coloured extract; a large part of this extract precipitates when the
alkali solution is neutralized by mineral acids.

‘3. Humus contains a somewhat larger amount of carbon than do
plant, animal, and microbial bodies; the carbon content of humus is
usually about 55 to 56 per cent., and frequently reaches 58 per cent.

‘4. Humus contains considerable nitrogen, usually about 3 to 6 per
cent. The nitrogen concentration may be frequently less than this
figure; in the case of certain high-moor peats, for example, it may be
only 0-5~0-8 per cent. It may also be higher, especially in sub-soils,

frequently reaching 10 to 12 per cent. . . .
‘5. Humus contains the elements carbon and nitrogen in proportions

[PAG 43]
- 28 SOIL-FERTILITY IN AGRICULTURE

which are close to 10:1; 3! this‘is true of many soils and of humus in sea
bottoms. This ratio varies considerably with the nature of the humus,
the stage of its decomposition, the nature and depth of soil from which.”
it is obtained, the climatic and other environmental conditions under .
which it is formed.

‘6. Himus is not in a static, but rather if a dynamic, condition,
since it is constantly formed from plant and animal residues. and is. ”
continuously decomposed further by micro-organisms. .

‘7. Humus serves as a source of energy for the development of various
groups of micro-organisms, and during decomposition gives off a cone.
tinuous stream of carbon dioxide and ammonia. .

‘8. Humus is characterized’ by a high capacity of base-exchange, of -
combining with various other soil constituents, of absorbing water, and -

of swelling, and by other physical and physico-chemical properties . -

which make it a highly valuable constituent of substrates which support
plant and animal life.’ .

To this list of properties must be added the role of humus as:
a cement in creating and maintaining the compound soil particles |
so important in the maintenance of tilth.

The effect of humus on the crop is nothing short of profound.
The farmers and peasants who live in close touch with Nature can

‘tell by a glance at the crop whether or nut the soil is rich in humus. ~
The habit of the plant then develops something approaching —
personality; the foliage assumes a characteristic set; the leaves
acquire the glow of health; the flowers develop depth of colour;
the minute morphological characters of the whole of the plant
organs become clearer and sharper. Root development is profuse:
the active roots exhibit not only turgidity but bloom,

The influence of humus on the plant is not confined to the out-
ward appearance of the various organs. The quality ofthe produce
is also affected. Seeds are better developed, and so yield better
crops and also provide live stock with a satisfaction not conferred
by the produce of worn-out land. The animals need less food if
it comes from fertile soil. Vegetables and fruit grown on land
rich in humus are always superior in quality, taste, and keeping
power to those raised by other means. The quality of wines, other
things being equal, follows the same rule. Almost every villager
in countries like France appreciates these points and will talk of
them freely without the slightest prompting.

In the case of fodder a very interesting example of the relation

[PAG 44]
‘THE NATURE OF SOIL FERTILITY + 29

between soil fertility and quality has recently been investigated.
This was noticed in the meadows of La Crau between Salon and
Arles in Provence. Here the fields are irrigated with muddy water,
containing finely ‘divided limestone drawn from the Durance, and
. manured mostly with farm-yard manure. The soils are open and
permeable, the land is well drained naturally. AU the factors on
which soil fertility depends are present together—an open soil
- with ample organic matter, ample moisture, and the ideal climate
for growth. Any grazier who saw these meadows for the first time
.wolild at once be impressed by them: a walk through the fields at
hay-making would prepare him for the news that it pays the
owners of high-quality animals to obtain their roughage from this
distant source. Several cuts of hay are produced every year,
which enjoy such a reputation for quality that the bales are sent
long distances by motor lorry to the various racing stables of
France and are even exported to Newmarket. The small stomach
of the racehorse needs the very best food possible. This the-
meadows of La Crau help to produce.
The origin of these irrigated meadows would provide an inter-
esting story. Did they arise as the result of a set of permanent
_ manurial experiments on the Broadbalk model or through the
work of some observant local pioneer? I suspect the second
alternative will be found to be nearer the truth. A definite answer
- to this question is desirable ‘because in a recent discussion at
Rothamsted, on the relation between a fertile soil and high-quality
produce, it was stated that no evidence of such a connexion could
be discovered in the literature. The farmers of Provence, however,
have supplied it and also a measure of quality in the shape of a
satisfactory price. For the present the only way of measuring
quality seems to be by selling it. It cannot be weighed and
measured by the methods of the laboratory. Nevertheless it exists:
moreover it constitutes a very important factor in agriculture.
Apparently some of the experiment stations have not yet come to
grips with this factor: the farmers have. The sooner therefore that
effective liaison is established between these two agencies the
. better.
The effect of soil fertility on live stock can be observed in the
field. As animals live on crops we should naturally expect the

[PAG 45]
30 | SOIL FERTILITY IN AGRICULTURE

character of the plant as regards nutrition to be passed on to stock. .
This is so. The effect of a fertile soil can at once be seen in the
condition of the animals. This is perhaps most easily observed in
the bullocks fattened on some of the notable pastures in Great
Britain. The animals show a well-developed bloom, the coat and .
skin look arid feel right, the eyes are clear, bright, and lively. The
posture of the animal betokens health and well-being. ‘It is not
necessary to weigh or measure them. A glance on the part of a-
successful grazier, or ofa butcher accustomed to deal with high-class
animals, is sufficient to tell them whether all is well or whether
there is something wrong with the soil or the management of the
animals or both. The results of a fertile soil and proper methods
of management are measured by the prices these animals fetch in .
the market and the standing of the farmer in these miarkets. It:
should be a compulsory item in the training of agricultural investi-_
gators to accompany some of the best of our English cattle from

. the pasture to the market and watch what happens there. They
would at once discover that the most fertile pastures produce the
best animals, that auctioneers and buyers detect quality instantly, -
and that such animals find a ready sale and command the best
prices. The reputation of the pastures is finally passed « on to the
butcher and to his clients.

Resistance to insect and fungous disease is also conferred by
humus. Perhaps the best examples of this are to be seen in the © .
East. In India, the crops grown on the highly fertile soils round
the 500,000 villages suffer remarkably little from pests. This
subject is developed “at length in a future-chapter (p. 156) when
the retreat of the crop and of the animal before the parasite is
discussed.

Soil fertility not only influences crops and live stock but also the
fauna of the locality. This is perhaps most easily seen in the fish
of streams which flow through areas of widely differing degrees of
fertility. An example of such difference is referred to at the end of
Chapter V of Isaac Walton’s Compleat Angler in the following words:.

| ‘And so I shall proceed next to tell you, it is certain, that certain
fields near Leorninster, a town in Herefordshire, are observed to make
sheep that graze upon them more fat than the next, and also to bear
- finer wool; that is to say, that in that year in which they feed in such a

[PAG 46]
,

‘THE NATURE OF SOIL FERTILITY gi

particular pasture, they shall yield finer wool than they did that year
before they came to feed in it, and coarser again if they shall return to
their former pasture; and again return to a finer wool, being fed in the
fine wool ground. Which I tell you, that you may the better believe
that I am certain, if I catch a trout in one meadow he shall be white
and faint, and very likely to be lousy; and as certainly if J catch a trout
in the next-meadow, he shall be strong and red and lusty and much
better meat: trust me, scholar. I have caught many a trout in a particu-
lar meadow, that the very shape and enamelled colour of him hath
been such as hath joyed me to look on him: and I have then with much
pleasure concluded with Solomon, “Everything is beautiful in his
season”,”

Soil fertility is the condition which results from the operation
of Nature’s round, from the orderly revolution of the wheel of
life, from the adoption and faithful execution of the first principle
of agriculture—there must always be a perfect balance between
the processes of growth and the processes of decay. The conse-
quences of this còndition are a living soil, abundant crops of good
quality, and live stock which possess the bloom of health. The
key to a fertile soil.and a prosperous agriculture is humus.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Rayner, M. C. Mycorrhiza: an Account 6f Non-pathogenic Infection by Fungi in Vascular
Plants and Bryophytes, London, 1927.
—— “Mycorrhiza i in relation to Forestry’, Forestry, viti, 1934, p. 96; x, 1936, p. 15
and xiii, 1939, p. 19.
WaKaiany S.A. Humus: Origin, Chemical Composition, and Importance in Nature, London,
1938.

[PAG 47]
CHAPTER III
THE RESTORATION OF FERTILITY

TE moment mankind undertook the business of raising crops
and breeding animals, the processes of Nature were subjected
to interference. Soil fertility was exploited for the growing of food
and the production of the raw materials—such as wool, skins, and
vegetable fibres—needed for clothing. Up to the dawn of the
Industrial Revolution in the West, the losses of humus involved in
.these agricultural operations were made up either by the return
of waste material to the soil or by taking up virgin land.

Where the return of wastes balanced the losses of humus in-
volved in production, systems of agriculture became stabilized and
there was no loss of fertility. The example of Chiria has already
been quoted. The old mixed farming of a large part of Europe,: _
including Great Britain—characterized by a correct balance ’
between arable and live stock, the conversion of wastes into farm-
yard manure, methods of sheep folding, and-the copious use of
the temporary ley—is another instance of the same thing.

The constant exploitation of new areas to replace worn-out
land has also gone on for centuries and is still taking place. Some-
times this has involved wars and conquests: at other times nothing
more than taking up fresh prairie or forest land wherever this was
to be found. A special method is adopted by some primitive
tribes. The forest growth is burnt down, the store of humus is .
converted into crops, the exhausted land is given back to Nature
for reafforestation and the building up of a new reserve of humus.
In a rough and ready way fertility is maintained. Such shifting
cultivation still exists all over the world, but like the taking up of ~
new land is only possible when the population is small and suitable
land abundant. This burning process has even been incorporated
into permanent systems of agriculture and has+proved ‘of great ©
value in rice cultivation in western India. Here the intractable .
soils of the rice nurseries have to be prepared during the last part ‘
of the hot season so that the seedlings are ready for transplanting
by the break of the monsoon. This is achieved by covering the
nurseries with branches collected from the forest and setting fire

.

x ~ ca

[PAG 48]
THE RESTORATION OF FERTILITY 33

to the-mass. The heat destroys the colloids, restores the tilth, and
makes the manuring and cultivation of the rice nurseries possible.

It is an easy matter to destroy a balanced agriculture. Once the
demand for food and raw materials increases and good prices are
obtained for the produce of the soil, the pressure on soil fertility
becomes intense. The temptation to convert this fertility into
money becomes irresistible. Western agriculture was subjected to
this strain by the very rapid developments which followed the
invention of the steam-engine, the internal combustion engine,
electrically driven motors, and improvements in communications
and transport. Factory after factory arose; a demand for labour
followed; the urban population increased. All these developments
provided new and expanding markets for food and raw materials.
These were supplied in three ways—by cashing-in the existing
fertility of the whole world, by the use of a temporary substitute
for soil fertility in the shape of artificial manures, and by a com-
bination of both methods. The net result has been that agricul-
ture has become unbalanced and therefore unstable.