=== An Agricultural Testament - Albert Howard.pdf — CHUNK 10/14 ===
Chars: 44,411 | Offset: 401,847



‘ direction and has permitted such a state of things to arise and to
develop must itself be in need of overhaul. This task has been
attempted; the existing structure of agricultural research has
been subjected to a critical examination; the results ‘are set out
in | Chapter XIII. . .

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Howarp, A. Crop Production in India, Oxford University Press, 1924, p. 176.
— ‘The Role of Insects and Fungi in Agriculture’, Empire Cotton Growing Review,

xiii, 1936, p. 186.
——— ‘Insects and Fungi in Agriculture’, Empire Cotton Growing Review, xv, 1938, p. 215.
‘Toson, S. D. ‘Humus and Witchweed’, Rhodesia Agricultural Journal, xxxv, 1938,

*_ p. 805.

[PAG 198]
T: the last chap er the retreat of the crop and the mal before
the parasite assed. e was regarded Nature 5
verdict on systems of agriculture * which the soil is d prived of its
jnanurial NE the store © humus 15 and not
replenishe?, oth crops and first cease 10 thrive and then
often fi r iscase. 1 er word! e of the ©
causes of dis ase on arm is bad soil manageme

How do produce ofan impover's d soil affect the men
and women tho have to consume gt? This 5 e of the

resent chapter cussed, not pasis of complete

for future WOT No other presenta is possibi ecause of the
paucity, for thi moment, © direct vidence 20 natura!
difficulties of the subject
In the casé of crops and live stock, expe ments asy. The
investigato” not hampe! d in any 3 ‘all control of
jis materi and freedom in perimenta do annot expel
ment on human peings in e way. TA nly subjects tha
might conceivably pe used for nutriti Voci con-
ventional Yines are to b ound in CO} centratio: camps, convict
prisons, in asyl Objections to using them for such pur

oses would mo y be ais they were not, th
investigator WO dealing Vife in caP i nd wit
abnormal conditions resul! ptained Wo la not pecessarily
apply to the populate a whol

Perhaps the © ef difficulty at ment iN ollowing UP the
possible connexion etween the oduce of a f oil and the
health of the Pe pie whi ave to CO me it, 15 t0 ptain from
well-farmed lan gular supplies of duce ¥ erfectly
fresh conditi cept in 3 few cases: rketed
according t0 the way it js gro puyer kno nothing ©
how it was ma ed. Th only way 1° obtain SU materia
would be for the investigator t© ak e of! nd grow
the food itself. This, so fa: wledge gocss # t been

[PAG 199]
172. HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

done. This omission alone explains the scarcity of direct results È

and why so little real progress has been made in human nutrition.
Most of the work of the past has been founded on the use of food
material very indifferently grown. Moreover, no particular care
has been taken to see that the food has been eaten fresh from its
source. Such investigations therefore can have no solid foundation.

Apart from the evidence that can be gathered. from nutrition
experiments, is there anything to be learnt about health from
agriculture itself? Can the-East which, long before the Roman
Empire began or America was discovered, had already developed ‘
the systems of good farming which are in full swing to-day, throw
any light on the relation between a fertile soil and a healthy
population? It is well known that both China and India can
show large areas of well-farmed land, which for centuries have
carried very large populations. Unfortunately two factors—over- .
population and periodic crop failures due to irregular rainfall—
make it almost impossible to draw any general lessons from these’
countries. The population, looked at in the mass, is always re-
covering from one catastrophe after another. Over-population
introduces a disturbing factor—long-continued semi-starvation—
so powerful in its effects on the race and on the individual that any
benefits arising from a fertile soil are entirely obscured.

When, however, the population of the various parts of India is
examined, very suggestive differences between the races which
. make up its 350 million inhabitants are disclosed. The physique
seen in the northern area is strikingly superior to that of the
southern, eastern, and western tracts. We owe the investigation
of the causes of these differences to McCarrison, who found that .
they corresponded with the food consumed. There‘is a gradually
diminishing value in the food from the north to the east, south and
west in respect of the amount and quality of the proteins, the
quality of the cereal grains forming the staple article of diet, the
quantity and quality of the fats, the mineral and vitamin content,
as well as in the balance of the food as a whole. .

Generally speaking the people of northern India, which include
some of the finest races of mankind, are wheat eaters, the wheat
being consumed in the form of thin, flat cakes made from flour,
coarse but fresh-ground in a quern. All the proteins, vitamins, and

[PAG 200]
1
-

SOIL FERTILITY. AND NATIONAL HEALTH ° 173

mineral salts in the grain are consumed. The second most im-
portant article of diet is fresh milk and milk products—clarified
butter, curds, and buttermilk; the third item is the seed of pulse
crops; the fourth vegetables and fruit. Meat, as a rule, is very
sparingly eaten except by the Pathans.

Turn now to the other parts of India, east, west, and south, in
which the rice tracts provide the staple food. This cereal—a
relatively poor grain at best—is parboiled, milled or polished,
washed in many changes of water, and finally boiled. It is thereby
deprived of much of its protein and mineral salts and of almost all
its vitamins. In addition, very little milk or milk products are
consumed, while the protein content of the diet is low both in
amount and quality. Vegetables and fruit are only sparingly
eaten. It is these shortcomings in their food that explain the poor
physique of the peoples of the'rice areas.

In order to prove that these bodily differences were due to food,
McCarrison carried out experiments on young growing rats.

“When young growing rats of healthy stock were fed on’ diets
similar to those of the races of northern India, the health and
physique of the rats were good; when they were fed on the diets
in vogue in the rice areas, the health and physique of the rats
were bad; when they were fed on the dicts of races with middling
physique, the health and physique of the rats were ‘middling.
Other things being equal, good or bad diet led to good or bad
health and physique. °

When the health and physique of the various northern Indian
races were studied in detail the best were those of the Hunzas, a
hardy, agile, and vigorous people, living in one of the high
mountain valleys of the Gilgit Agency, where an ancient system
of irrigated terraces has been maintained for thousands of ycars
in a high state of fertility. There is little or no difference between
the kinds of food eaten by these hillmen and by the rest of northern
India. There is, however, a great difference in the way these foods
are grown. The total area of the irrigated terraces of the Hunzas
is small; ample soil aeration results from their construction; the
irrigation water brings annual additions of fine silt produced by
.the neighbouring glacier;the very greatest care is taken to return
to the soil all human, animal, and vegetable wastes after being

[PAG 201]
174 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

first composted ‘together. Land is limited: upon the way it is
looked after life depends. A perfect agriculture, in which all the
factors that combine to produce high quality in food, naturally
results.

What of the people who live upon this produce? In The:Wheel
of Health, Wrench has gathered together all the information avail-
able and has laid stress on their marvellous agility and endurance,
good temper and cheerfulness. These men think nothing of
covering the 60 miles to Gilgit on foot in one stretch, doing their
business and then returning. '

There is one point about the Hunza agriculture which needs
further investigation, The staircase cultivation of these hillmen
receives annual dressings of fresh rock-powder, produced by the
grinding effect of the glacierice on therocks and carried to the fields
in the irrigation water. Is there any benefit conferred on the
soil and on the plant by these annual additions of finely divided
materials? We do not know the composition of this silt. If-it
contains finely divided limestone its value is obvious. If it is
made up for the most part of crushed silicates, its possible signifi-
cance awaits investigation. Do the mineral residues in the soil
need renewal as humus does? Ifso, then Nature has provided us
with an Experiment Station ready-made and with results that
cannot be neglected. Perhaps in the years to come, some heaven-
sent investigator of the Charles Darwin type will go thoroughly
into this Hunza question on the spot, and will set out clearly all
the factors on which their agriculture and their marvellous health
depend.

A study of the races of India and of their diet, coupled with the
experimental work on rats carried out by McCarrison, leaves no
doubt that the greatest single factor in the production of good
health is the right kind of food and the greatest single factor in the
production of bad health is the wrong kind of food. Further, the
very remarkable health and physique enjoyed by the Hunza
hillmen appeats to be due to the efficiency of their ancient system
of farming.

These results suggest that the population of Great Britain should
be studied and the efficiency of our food supply investigated. If
the physique and health ofa nation ultimately depend.on the fresh

[PAG 202]
SOIL FERTILITY AND NATIONAL HEALTH . 175

produce of well-farmed land, if bad farming is a factor in the pro--
duction of poor physique and bad health, we must set about
improving our agriculture without delay..

Two very different methods have recently been employed for
testing the efficiency of the food supply of this country. In the
first case (Cheshire) the population of a whole county, which
includes both rural and urban areas, has been studied in the mass
. for a period of twenty-five years and the general results have been

recorded. In the second case (Peckham) a number of families
have been periodically examined with a view to throwing light
on the general health and efficiency of a group of comparatively
well-to-do workers in a city like London.

The methods adopted in the study of the population of Cheshire

-and in the publication of the results are highly original. About
twenty-five years ago, the National Health Insurance ‘Act for the

Prevention and Cure of Sickness came into force. This measure

has brought the population under close medical observation for a

quarter of a century. If the experience of the Panel and family

doctors of the county could be synthesized, valuable information
as to the general health of the community would be available.
‘This has been accomplished. The local Medical and Panel Com-
mittee of Cheshire; which is in touch with the 600 family doctors
of the county, has recorded its experience in the form of a Medical
* Testament. They find it possible to report definite progress in the

‘Cure of Sickness’—the second part of the objective framed by the

National Health Insurance Act. There is no doubt that.we have

learnt to ‘postpone the event of death’ and this is the morc

remarkable in view of the rise in sickness, in short the failure of the
first part of the Act’s objective. On this latter count there is no
room for complacency.

‘Our daily work brings us repeatedly to the same point—this
illness results from a life-time of wrong nutrition.’ They then
examine the consequences of wrong nutrition under four heads— -
bad teeth, rickets, anaemia, and constipation—and indicate how
all this and much other trouble can be prevented by right feeding.
For example, in dealing with the bad teeth of English children
some striking facts are emphasized. In 1936 out of 3,463,948
schoolchildren examined, no less than 2,425,299 needed dental

[PAG 203]
176 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

treatment. That this reproach can be removed has been-shown by
Tristan da Cunha, where the population is fed on the fresh pro-
duce of sea and soil—fish, potatoes, and seabirds’ eggs are the
staple diet with sufficient milk and butter, meat occasionally and
some vegetables—all raised naturally without the help of artificial
manures and poison sprays. In 1932, 156 persons examined had
3,181 permanent teeth of which 74 were carious. Imported flour
and sugar have been brought in to a greater extent of late, which
may account for the tendency of the teeth to deteriorate observed
in 1937.
The Testament then goes on to the work of McCarrison (re-
+ ferred to above) ‘whose experiments afford convincing proof of
the effects of food and guidance in the application of the know-
ledge acquired’. This has been applied in local practice in Cheshire
and the results have been amazing. Two examples will suffice.
1: In a Cheshire village the nutrition of expectant mothers is
supervised by the local doctor once a month. The food of the
mother is whole-meal bread, raw milk, butter, Cheshire cheese,
oatmeal porridge, eggs, broth, salads in abundance, green leaf.
vegetables, liver and fish weekly, fruit in abundance and a little
meat. The whole-meal bread is made from a mixture of two parts ‘
locally grown wheat, pulverized by a steel fan revolving 2,500
times a minute, and one part of raw wheat-germ (fresh off the
rollers of a Liverpool mill). The flour is baked within thirty-six
hours at most—a point to be rigidly insisted upon—and a rather
close but very palatable bréad is obtained. With rare exceptions
the mothers feed their infants at the breast—nine months is
advised and then very slow weaning finishing at about a year.
The nursing mother’s food continues as in pregnancy; the infants
are fed five times a day with four-hour intervals beginning at
6 am. The children are splendid; perfect sets of teeth are now
more common; they sleep well; pulmonary diseases are. almost
‘unknown; one of their most striking features is their good humour
and happiness. They are sturdy-limbed, beautifully skinned,
normal children. This was not a scientific experiment. It was part
of the work of family practice. The humah material was entirely
unselected and the food was not specially grown; but that, in spite
of these imperfections, the practical application of McCarrison’s

.

[PAG 204]
SOIL FERTILITY AND NATIONAL HEALTH i 177

work should yield recognizable results. shows that in a single
generation improvement of the-race can be achieved.

2. A young Irishman aged 23, with a physique and an alertness
of mind and body it was a delight to behold, was found to be
suffering from catarrhal jaundice after two months’ residence in
England, where he had been living on a diet mostly composed of
bacon, white bread, tneat sandwiches and tea, with a little meat
and an occasional egg. In Ireland his food had consisted of the
fresh natural products of the soil—potatoes, porridge, milk and
milk products, broth (made from vegetables) and occasional meat,
eggs, and fish. The change over to a diet of white bread and
sophisticated food was at once followed by disease. This case
shows how quickly good health can be lost by improper feeding.

The Testament then leaves the purely medical domain and
deals with that principle or quality in the varied diets which pro-
duces the same result—health and freedom from disease (such as
the Esquimaux on flesh, liver, blubber, and fish; the Hunzas and
Sikhs on wheaten chappattis, fruit, milk, sprouted legumes and a
little meat; the islanders of Tristan on potatoes, seabirds’ eggs,
fish, and-cabbage). In all these cases the diets have one thing in
common—the food ‘is fresh and little altered by preparation. The
harvest of the sea is a natural product. When the foods are based
on agriculture, the natural cycle from soil to plant, animal and
man is complete without the intervention of any chemical or
substitution phase. In other words, when the natural produce of ,
sea and soil has escaped the attention of agricultural science and
the various food preservation processes, it would seem that health
results and that there is a marked absence of disease.

The last part of the Medical Testament deals with my own work
on the connexion between a fertile soil and healthy plants and
animals; with the means by which soil fertility can be restored and
maintained; with a number of examples in which this has been
‘done. These have already been described and need not be
repeated.

This remarkable document concludes with the following words:

‘The better manuring of the home land so as to bring an ample
succession of fresh food crops to the tables of our people, the arrest of
the present exhaustion of the soil and the restoration and permanent

N

[PAG 205]
178 HEALTH; INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE:
maintenance of its fertility concern us very closely. For nutrition and
the quality of food are the paramounit factors in fitness. No health
campaign can succeed unless the materials of which the bodies are |
built are sound. At present théy arè not.

‘Probably half our work is wasted, since our patients are so fed from
the cradle, indeed before the cradle, that they are certain contribu-
tions to a C3 nation. Even our country people share the white bread,
tinned salmon, dried milk régime. Against this the efforts of the doctor
resemble those of Sisiphus. °

“This is our medical testament, given to all whom it may concern—"
and whom does it not concern?”

The Testament was put to a public meeting held at Crewe on
March gend, 1939, by the Lord Lieutenant of Cheshire, Sir —
William Bromley-Davenport, and carried by a unanimous vote.
More than five hundred persons representing the activities of the
County of Cheshire were present. The Medical Testament was
published in full in the issue of the British Medical Fournal of April
15th, 1939. It has been widely noticed in the press all over the
Empire.

The experience of the Cheshire doctors is supported by the work
of Doctors Williamson and Pearse at the Peckham Health Centre
in South London. In connexion with the study of families whose
. average wage is between £3. 15s. and £4. 105. a week, about

20,000 medical examinations have been recorded. The results
have recently been published in book forrn under the title Biologists
in Search of Material (Faber & Faber). It was found that no less
‘than 83 per cent. of apparently normal people had something the
‘ matter with them, ranging from some minor maladjustment to
incipient disease. One of the most important contributions of
these Peckham pioneérs has been to unearth the beginnings of a
C3 population. The next step will be to see how far these early
symptoms of trouble can be removed by fresh food grown on
fertile soil. For this the Centre must have: (1) a large area of land
of its own on which vegetables, milk, and meat can be raised, and
(2) a mill and bakehouse in which whole-meal bread, produced
on Cheshire lines from English wheat grown on fertile soil, can
be-prepared. In this way a large amount of food resembling that
of the Hunza hillmen can be obtained. The medical records of
the families which consume this produce, after the change over

[PAG 206]
SOIL FERTILITY AND NATIONAL HEALTH 179

from the canned stuff of the shops and the semi-carrion of the cold
stores has been made, will form interesting reading.

- The health of our population has been studied by these two
very different methods. Both lead to the same conclusion, namely,
that all is not well: that there is an enormous amount of indis-
position, inefficiency, and actual disease. The Medical Testa-
ment boldly suggests that want of freshness in the food and im-
proper methods of agriculture are at the root of the mischief.
This provides a stimulating hypothesis for future work. A case
for action has been established. The basis of the public health
system of the future has been foreshadowed.

A certain amount of supporting evidence is already available.
Two recent examples can be quoted, the first dealing with live’
stock, the second with schoolboys.

At Marden Park in Surrey, Sir Bernard Greenwell has found
that a change over to a ration of fresh home-grown food (raised on
soil manured with humus) fed to poultry and pigs has been
followed by three important results: (1) the infantile mortality has
to all intents and purposes disappeared; (2) the general health and
well-being of the live stock has markedly improved; (3) a reduc-
tion of about 10 per cent. in the ration has been obtained because
such home-grown produce possesses an extra-satisfying power.

At a large preparatory school near London, at which both
boarders and day-boys are educated, the change over from
vegetables, grown with artificial manures, to produce grown on
the same land with Indore compost has been accompanied by
results of considerable interest to parents and to the medical
profession. Formerly, in the days when artificials “were used,
cases of colds, measles, and scarlet fever used to run through the
school. Now they tend to be confined to the single case imported
from outside. Further, the taste and quality of the vegetables have
definitely improved since they were raised with humus.

Much more work on these lines is needed. A search will have
to be made throughout Great Britain and Northern Ireland for
resident communities such as boarding-schools, training centres,
the resident staff of hospitals and convalescent homes which
satisfy the following four conditions: (1) the control of sufficient
fertile and well-farmed land for growing the vegetables, fruit,

.

[PAG 207]
-

180 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

milk and milk products, and meat required by the residents; (2)
a mill and bakehouse for producing wholemeal bread with the
new Cambridge wheats grown on fertile soil without the assistance
of artificial manures; (3) the medical supervision of the community
by a carefully chosen disciple of preventive medicine; (4) a man
or woman in control who is keenly interested in putting the find-
ings of the Medical Testament to the test and who is prepared to
surmount any difficulties that may arise. :In a very few years it is
more than probable that islands of health will arise in an ocean of
indisposition. No controls will be necessary—these will be pro-
vided by the country-side round about. Elaborate statistics will
be superfluous as the improved health of these communities will
‘speak for itself and will need no support from numbers, tables,
curves, and the higher mathematics. Mother earth in the appear-
ance of her children will provide all that is necessary. The
materials for Medical Testament No. 2 will then be available.
Cheshire no doubt will again take the lead and provide a second
milestone on the long road which must be traversed before this
earth can be made ready to receive her children.

In this work research can assist. Medical investigations should
be deflected from the sterile desert of disease to the study of health .
‘to mankind in relation to his environment. Agricultural re-
search, after réorganization on the lines suggested in the next
chapter, should start afresh from a new base-line—soil fertility—
and so provide the raw material for the nutritional studies of the
future—fresh produce from fertile soil. The agricultural colleges
with their farms should devote some of their resources to feeding
themselves, and so demonstrating what the products of well-
farmed land can accomplish. They should strive to equal and then
to surpass what a tribe of northern India has already achieved.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Scorr Wituiasson, G., and Innes Pearse, H. Biologists in Search of Material, Faber
& Faber, London, 1938.

Howarp, Sir ALBERT. ‘Medical Testament on Nutrition’, British Medical Journal,
May 27th, 1939, p. 1106.

McCarron, Sir Rosert. ‘Nutrition and National Health’ (Cantor Lectures),
Journal of the Royal Society of Arts, bocxiv, 1936, pp. 1047, 1067, and 1087.

‘Medical Testament on Nutrition’, Supplement to the British Medical Journal, April
15th, 1939, p. 157; Supplement to the New English Weekly, April 6th, 1939.

Wrenca, G. T. The Wheel of Health, London, 1938.

[PAG 209]
182 . AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH

humus. Liebig believed he had shown that this view was unten-
able; humus was insoluble in water and therefore could not
influence the soil solution. i -

- In all this he followed the science of the moment. In his on-
slaught on the humus theory he was so sure of his ground that he
‘did not call in Nature to verify his conclusions. It did not occur to.
him that while the humus theory, as then expressed, might be:
wrong, humus itself might be right. Like so many of his disciples :
in the years to come, he failed to attach importance to the fact
that the surface soil always contains very active humus, and did
not perceive that critical field experiments, designed to find out
if chemical manures were sufficient to supply all thé needs of
crops, should always be done on the sub-soil, after removing the
top g inches or so. If this is not arranged for, the yield of any. crop
may be influenced: by the humus already in the soil. Failure to
perceive this obvious fact is the main reason why Liebig and his
disciples went astray.- .

He also failed to realize the supreme inhportance to the investi-
gator of a first-hand knowledge of practical agriculture, and the
significance of the past experience of the tillers of the soil. He was
only qualified for his task on the scientific side; he was no farmer;
as an investigator of the ancient art of agriculture he was only
halfa man. He was unable to visualize his problem from two very
different points of view at one and the same moment—the scientific’
and the practical. His failure has cast its shadow on much of the
scientific investigation of the next hundred years. Rothamsted, |
which started in 1843, was profoundly influenced’ by the Liebig
tradition. The celebrated experiments on Broadbalk Field caught
the fancy of the farming world. They were so telling, so systematic,
so spectacular that they set the fashion till the end of the last
century, when the great era of agricultural chemistry began to-
wane. During this period (1840-1900), agricultural science was
a branch of chemistry; the use of artificial manures became firmly
welded into the work and outlook ofthe Experiment Stations; the
great importance of nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potash (K)
in the soil solution was established; what may briefly. be described.
as the NPK mentality was born.

The trials of chemical manures, however, brought the investi-

[PAG 210]
A CRITICISM OF PRESENT-DAY AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 183

-gators from the laboratory to the land; they came into frequent
contact with practice; their outlook and experience gradually
widened. One result was the discovery of the limitations of
chemical science; the deficiencies of the soil, suggested by chemical
analysis, were not always made up by the addition of the appro-
priate artificial manure; the problems of crop production could
not. be dealt with by chemistry alone. The physical texture of the
soil began to be considered; the pioneering work of Hilgard and
King in America led to the development of a new branch of the
subject—soil physics—which is still being explored. Pasteur’s
work on fermentation and allied subjects, by drawing attention
to the fact that the soil is inhabited by bacteria and other forms of
life, disclosed a new world. A notable elucidation of the complex
life of the soil was contributed by Charles Darwin’s fascinating
account of the earthworm. The organisms concerned with the
nitrification of organic matter were discovered by Winogradsky
and the conditions necessary for their activity in pure cultures
were determined. Another branch of agricultural science—soil
bacteriology—arose. While the biology and physics of the soil
were being studied, a new school of soil science arose in Russia.
Soils began to be regarded-as independent natural growths: to have
form and structure due to climate, vegetation, and geological
origin. Systems of soil classification, based primarily on the soil
profile, with an appropriate nomenclature developed in harmony
with these views, which, for the moment, have been. widely
accepted. A new branch of soil science—pcedology—arose. The
Liebig conception of soil fertility was thus gradually enlarged and
it became clear that the problem of increasing the produce of the
soil did not lie within the domain of any one science but embraced
at least four—chemistry, physics, bacteriology, and geology.

‘‘. At the beginning of the present century, the investigators
began to pay more attention to what is after all the chicf agent
in crop production—the plant itself. The rediscovery of Mendel’s
law by Correns, the conception of the unit species which followed
the work of Johannsen and the recognition of its importance in
improvement by selection have led directly to the modern studies
of cultivated crops, in which the Russians have made such notc-
worthy contributions. The whole world is now being ransacked

[PAG 211]
184 AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH -

to provide the plant breeders with a wide range of raw material.
These botanical investigationis are constantly broadening and now.
embrace the root system, its relation to the soil type, the resistance
of the plant ta disease, as well as the internal mechanism by which
inheritance takes place. The practical results of the last forty
years which have followed the application of botanical science to
agriculture are very considerable. In wheat, for example, the
labours of Saunders in Canada led to the production of Marquis,
an early variety with short’straw, which soon covered 20,000,000
-acres in Canada and the neighbouring States of the Union. ‘This
is the most successful wheat-hybrid yet produced. In Australia the
new wheats raised by Farrer were soon widely cultivated. In
England the new hybrids raised at Cambridge established them-
selves in the wheat-growing areas of this country. In India the
Pusa wheats covered several million acres of land. By 1925 the
total area of the new varieties of wheat had reached over 25,000,000
acres. When the annual dividend, in the form of increased
wealth, was compared with the capital invested in these investiga-
tions, it was at once evident that the return was many times greater
than that yielded by the most successful industrial enterprise.
Similar results have been obtained with other crops. The new
varieties of malting barley, raised by Beaven, have for years been
a feature of the English country-side; the new varieties-of sugar-
cane produced by Barber at Coimbatore in South India soon
replaced the indigenous types of cane in northern India. In cotton,
jute, rice, grasses, and clovers and many other crops new varieties
have been obtained; the old varieties are being systematically
replaced. Nevertheless the gain per acre obtained by changing
the variety is as a rule small. As will be seen in the next chapter,
the great problem of agriculture at the moment is the intensive
cultivation of these new types; how best to arrange a marriage
between the new variety and a fertile soil. Unless this is done,
the value of a new variety can only-be transient; the increased
yield will be obtained at the expense of the soil capital; the labours
of the plant breeders will have provided another boomerang.
A number of other developments have taken place which must’
briefly. be mentioned. Since, the Great War the factories then
engaged in the fixation of atmospheric nitrogen for the manu-

[PAG 212]
A CRITICISM OF PRESENT-DAY AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 185

facture of the vast quantities of explosives, needed to defend and .
to destroy armies well entrenched, have had to find a new market.
This was provided by the large area of land impoverished by the
over-cropping of the war period. A demand was created by the
low price at which the mass-produced unit of nitrogen could be
put on the market and by the reliability of the product. Phos-
phates and potash fell into line. Ingenious mixtures of artificial
manures, containing everything supposed to be needed by the
various crops, could be purchased all over the world. Sales
increased rapidly; the majority of farmers and market gardeners
soon based their manurial programme on the cheapest forms of
nitrogen, phosphorus, and potash or on the cheapest mixtures.
During the last twenty years the progress of the artificial manure
‘industry has been phenomenal; the age of the manure bag has
arrived; the Liebig tradition returned in full force.

The testing of artificial manures and new varicties has necessi-
tated innumerable field experiments, the published results of
which are bewildering in their volume, their diversity, and often
in the conclusions to be drawn from them. By a judicious selection
of this material, it is possible to prove or disprove anything or
everything. Something was obviously needed to-regulate the

. torrent of field results and to ensure a greater measure of relia-
bility. This was attempted by the help of mathematics. The
technique was overhauled; the field plots were ‘replicated’ and
‘randomized’; the figùres were subjected to a rigid statistical
serutiny. Only those results which are fortunate enough to secure
what has been described as the fastidious approval of the higher
mathematics are now accepted. There is an obvious weakness in
the technique of these field experiments which must be mentioned.
Small plots and farms are very different things. It is impossible
to manage a small plot as a self-contained unit in the same way as
a good farm is conducted. .The essential relation between live
stock and the land is lost; there are no means of maintaining the
‘fertility of the soil by suitable rotations as is the rule in good
farming. The plot and the farm are obviously out of relation; the
plot does not even represent the field in which it occurs. A collec-
tion of field plots cannot represent the agricultural problem they
set out to investigate. It follows that any findings based on the

[PAG 213]
*

1867 AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH

‘ behaviour of these small fragments of artificially manured land

are unlikely to apply to agriculture. What possible advantage
therefore can be obtained by the application of the higher mathe-
matics to a technique which is so fundamentally unsound?

With the introduction of ‘artificials there has been a con-
tinuous increase in disease, both in crops and in live stock. This ‘
subject has already been discussed (p. 156). It is mentioned again .
to remind the reader of the vast volume of research on this topic,
completed and in progress.

Side by side with the intrusion of mathematics into agriculture,
another branch of the subject has grown up—economics. The
need for reducing expenditure so that farming could yield a

profit has brought every operation, including manuring and the .

treatment of disease, under examination in order to ascertain the
cost and what profit, if any, results. Costings are everywhere
the rule; the value of any experiment and innovation is largely
determined by the amount of profit which can be wrung from
Mother earth. The output of the farm-and of the factory have
been looked at fromthe same standpoint—dividends. Agriculture
joined the ranks of industry. °
©. Agricultural science, like Topsy, has indeed grown. In little
more than forty years a vast system of research institutes, experi- . »
niental farms, and district organizations (for bringing the results
of research to the farming community) has been created all over
the world. As this research structure has grown up in piecemeal -
fashion as a result of the work of the pioneers, it will be interesting
to examine it and to ascertain whether or not direction has been
maintained. Has the present organization any virtue in itself or
does it merely crystallize the stages reached in the scientific -
exploration of a vast biological complex? If it is useful it will be
justified by results; if its value is merely historical, its reform can
only be a question of time. :
In Great Britain two documents! have recently appeared which |
make it easy to conduct an inquest on agricultural research in this”
country. They describe fully the-structure and working of the -

1 Constitution and Functions of the Agricultural Research Council, H.M. Stationery Office,
London, 1938; Report on Agricultural Research in Great Britain, PEP., 16 Queen Anne’s
Gate, London, S.W. 1, 1938. :

[PAG 214]
“A CRITICISM OF PRESENT-DAY AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 187

official machine which'controls and finances research, the organiza-
tion of the work itself, and the methods of making theresults known
to farmers. In addition to the Treasury and the Committee of
the Privy Council, official control is exercised by no less than three
other organizations: (1) The Ministry of Agriculture (which
administers the grants); (2) the Development Commission. (which
awards funds from grants placed at its disposal by.the Treasury);
and.(3) the Agricultural Research Council (which reviews and
advises on applications for grants, and also co-ordinates State-
aided agricultural research in Great Britain), Eventually the
Research Institutes, which carry out the work, are reached.
These Research Institutes are fifty in number and are of three
types: :

(a) Government laboratories or research stations; -

(5) Institutes attached to universities or university colleges;

MO) Independent i institutes.

Most of these institutes were set up in 1911 to provide for basic
research in each of the agricultural sciences: agricultural econo-
mics, soil science, plant physiology, plant breeding, horticulture
and fruit research, plant pathology, animal heredity and genetics,
animal physiology and nutrition, animal diseases, dairy research,
food preservation and transport, agricultural enginecring and
agricultural meteorology. These groups can again be divided
into four classes: background research (dealing with fundamental
scientific principles); basic research (the recognized sphere of the
research institute); ad hoc research (the study of specific practical
problems, as they arise, such as the control of foot-and-mouth
disease); pilot or development research (such as the growing on
of new strains of plants).

After research proper, the organization then deals with the
results of its investigations. The first stage in this process is the
Provincial Advisory Service which operates in sixteen provinces.
From one to seven Advisory Officers are stationed at each centre,
their specialized knowledge being at the disposal of County
Organizers and farmers. The final link in the long chain from the
Treasury to the soil is provided by the Agricultural Organizers of
the County Councils, who act as a free Scientific Information
Bureau for farmers and market gardeners. Most counties also

[PAG 215]
188 AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH

support farm institutes which provide technical education ‘and
also have experimental farms of their own. Appended to this
research structure are two Imperial Institutes and nine Imperial
Bureaux, which provide an information and abstracting service-
in entomology, mycology, soil science, animal health, animal
nutrition and genetics, plant genetics, fruit production, agri-
cultural parasitology, and dairying. The number of agricultural
research workers in Great Britain is about 1,000. The total State
expenditure on agricultural research amounted in 1938 to about _
£700,000. This is about go per cent. of the total cost, the remain-
ing 10 per cent. being met by local authorities, universities,
marketing boards, private companies and individuals, agricultural
societies, fees, and sales of produce. The farmers, even when
organized as marketing boards, have shown little recognition
of the value of research and make no serious contribution to
its cost. : .

A formidable, complex, and costly organization has thus grown
up since 1911. No less than seven organs of the Central Govern-
“ment have to do with agricultural research, the personnel of
which has to be fed with.a constant stream of reports, memoranda,
and information which must absorb a large amount of the time
and energy of the men who really matter—the investigators. A
feature of the official control is the committee, a device which has
developed almost beyond belief since the Agricultural Research
Council came into being in 1934. Six standing committees were
first formed to carry out a survey of existing research. These led
to a crop of new committees to go farther into matters disclosed
by this preliminary survey. In addition to the six standing com-
mittees, no less than fifteen scientific committees are dealing with
the most important branches of research. Twelve of these fifteen
committees are considering the diseases of crops and live stock
—the main preoccupation of the Council at the present time.

Is so much machinery necessary? Between the Treasury (which
decides what sum can be granted) and the Research Institutes,
would not a single agency such as the Ministry of Agriculture be
all that is needed in the way of control? This would appear likely
‘when it-is remembered that there is one thing only in research
‘that matters—the man or woman who is to undertake it. Once

[PAG 216]
A CRITICISM OF PRESENT-DAY AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 189

these are found’ and provided with the means, nothing else is
necessary. The best seryice the official organization can then
perform is to remain in the background, ready to help when the
workers need assistance. It’ follows then that simplicity and
modesty must always be the keynote of the controlling authority.
A serious defect in the research organization proper is encoun-
tered at the very beginning. The Research Institutes are organized
- on the basis of the particular science, not on recognized branches
‘of farming. The instrument (science) and the subject (agriculture)
at once lose contact, The workers in these institutes confine them-
selves to some aspect of their specialized field; the investigations
soon become departmentalized; the steadying influence of first-
hand practical experience is the exception rather than the rule.
The reports of these Research Institutes describe the activitics of
large numbers of workers all busy on the periphery of the subject
and all intent on learning more and*more about less and less.
Looked at in the mass, the most striking feature of these institu-
tions is the fragmentation of the subject into minute units. ‘It is
true that attempts are made to co-ordinate this effort by such
devices as the formation of groups and teams, but as will be shown
later (p. 191) this rarely succeeds. Another disquieting feature is
the gap between science and practice. It is true that most, if not
all, of these establishments possess a farm, but this is mostly taken
up with sets of permanent experiments. I know of no research
institute in.Great Britain hesides Aberystwyth where a scientific
worker has under his personal control an area of Jand with his own
staff where he can follow the gleam wheresoever it may lead him.
Even Aberystwyth stops short before the animal is reached. The
improved strains of herbage plants and the method of growing
them are not followed to their logical conclusion—a flock of healthy
sheep ready for the market and a supply of well-nourished animals
by which the breed can be continued.
Has the official machine ever posed to itself such questions as
these? What would be the reaction of some Charles Darwin or
. Louis Pasteur of the future to one or other of these institutes?
What would have bcen'their fate if circumstances had compelled
them to remain in such an organization, working at some frag-
ment of science? How can the excessive departmentalization of

[PAG 217]
190 AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH

research provide that freedom without which “no progress has
ever been made in science? Is it rational in such a subject as agri-
culture to attempt to separate sciencé and practice? Will not the
organization of such research always be a contradiction in terms,
because the investigator is born not made? The official reply
to these questions would form interesting reading: , 3