=== An Agricultural Testament - Albert Howard.pdf — CHUNK 4/14 ===
Chars: 44,849 | Offset: 132,652



FTER the first complete account of the Indore Process was
A published i in 1931, the adoption: of the method at a number of
centres followed very quickly. The first results were summarized
in a lecture which appeared in the issue of the Journal of the Royal
Society of Arts of December 8th, 1933. About 2,000 extra copies of
this lecture were printed and distributed’ during the next two -
years/ By the end of 1935 it became evident that the method was ‘
making very rapid headway all over the world: an’ increasing
stream of interesting results were reported. These were described
in a second lecture on November 13th, 1935, which was printed
in the Journal of the Society of November 22nd, 1935. ‘This lecture
was then re-published in pamphlet form.. In all 6,425 extra copies
of this second lecture have been distributed. During 1936 still.
further progress was made, a brief account of which appeared in
. the Journal of the Royal Society of Arts of December 18th, 1936;
7,500 copies being printed. Two translations of the 1935 lecture
have been published. The first in German in Der Tropenpflanzer-
of February 1936, the second in Spanish in the Revista-del Instituto-
de Defensa del Café de Costa Rica of March 1937.

These papers did much to make the Indore Process known all
over the world and to start a number of new and active composting
centres. The position, as reached by July 1938, was briefly
sketched in a paper which was: published in the Journal of the
Ministry of Agriculture of Great Britain of August 1938.

In this and succeeding chapters an attempt will be made to
sum up progress to the time of going to press. It will be con-
venient in the first place to arrange this information under crops.

COFFEE
The first centre in Africa to take up the process was the Kinga-
tori Estate near Kyambu, a few miles from Nairobi, where work
began in February 1933. By the purest accident T saw the first

[PAG 69]
54 THE INDORE PROCESS

beginnings of composting at this estate. This occurred in the.
course of a tour round Africa which included a visit to the Great
Rift Valley. As I was about to start from Nairobi on this expedi-
tion, Major Belcher, the Manager of Kingatori, called upon me
and said that he had just been instructed by Major Grogan, the
proprietor of the Estate, to start the Indore Process and to convert
all possible wastes into humus. He asked me to help him and to’
discuss various practical details on the spot. I gave up the tour
to the Great Rift Valley and spent the day on the Kingatori Estate
instead, where it was obvious from the general condition of the
bushes and the texture of the soil that a continuous supply of
freshly made humus would transform this estate, which I was told -
was representative of the coffee industry near Nairobi. In a letter
dated September rgth, 1933, Major Belcher reported his first
results as follows:

‘I have 30 pits in regular use now, and am averaging 5 tons of ripe
compost from each pit. This will give me a dressing of 3} tons per acre
per annum and should, I think, gradually bring the soil into really,
good condition. .

‘I have already dressed 30 acres, but it is a little early to see any
result. It is 30 acres of young 4-year old coffee bearing a heavy crop. .
At the moment it is looking splendid, and if it keeps it up until the crop
is picked in December and enables the trees to bear heavily again next
.. year there will be no doubt in my mind that the compost is responsible.
Young trees with a big crop are very apt to suffer from die-back of the
primaries and light beans and no crop in the following year. There
is no sign of this at present.

‘I have had many interested visitors, and the Nairobi bookseller has
to keep sending for more copies of The Waste Products of Agriculture.

‘The District Commissioner at Embu has taken up the process exten-

sively with the double purpose of i improving, village sanitation and the
fertility of the soil. In fact, he started it some time before we did.
- “I understand that it will shortly be made illegal to export goat and
cattle manure from the native reserves, in which case your process will
be taken up by most of the European farmers in the Colony. One very:
influential member of the coffee industry remarked to me that he
thought your process would revolutionize coffee-growing and another
said that he considered it was the biggest step forward made in the
last ten years.’

Two years later he sent mé a second report in which he stated
that during the last 28 months 1,660 tons of compost, containing

[PAG 70]
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 55

about 1°5 per cent. of nitrogen, had been manufactured on this
estate and applied .to the land. The cost per ton was 4s. 4d.—
chiefly the expense involved in collecting raw material. The work
in progress had been shown to a constant stream of visitors from
other parts of Kenya, the Rhodesias, Uganda, Tanganyika, and
the Belgian Congo. Major Belcher has lost count of the actual
numbers.

This pioneering work has done much more than weld the Indore
Process into the routine work of the estate. It has served the pur-
pose of an experiment station and a demonstration area for the

‘ coffee industry throughout the world. Many new centres followed
Kingatori. The rapid spread of the method is summed up by
Major Grogan i in a letter dated Nairobi, May 15th, 1935, as

- follows:

‘You will be glad to know that your process is spreading rapidly in
these parts and has now become recognized routine practice on most of
‘ the well conducted coffee plantations, The cumulative effect of two

years on my plantation is wonderful. I have now established all round
my pits a large area of elephant grass for the purpose of providing bulk,
and we have made quite a lot of pocket-money by selling elephant
grass cuttings to the country-side.. I am now searching for the best
indigenous legumes to grow in conjunction with the elephant grass and
am getting very hopeful results from the various Crotalarias and Tephro-
sias which I have brought up from the desert areas of Taveta. They
get away quickly and so hold their own against the local weeds.”

Major Grogan in referring to the spread of the Indore Process
in East Africa, has omitted one very material factor, namely, his
personal share in this result. He initiated the earliest trial on the

- Kingatori Estate and has always insisted on the method having a
square deal in Kenya. In Tanganyika the influence of Sir Milsom
Rees, G.C.V.O., has led to similar results.

This example of the introduction and spread of the Indore
Process.on the coffee estates of Kenya and Tanganyika has been
given in detail for three reasons: (1) it. was one of the carliest
applications of the Indore method to the plantation industries;
(2) it is typical of many other similar applications clsewhere; and
(3) it first suggested to me a new field of work during retirement
in which the research experience of a lifetime could be fully
utilized. ‘

[PAG 71]
560 : ; THE INDORE’ PROCESS

Kenya | and Tanganyika are only two of the coffee centres of
the world. The largest producer is the New World. Here satis-
.factory progress has been made following the publication in the
West India Committee Circular of April 23rd; 1936, of a short account
of the Indore Process. This led to important developments, first
in Costa Rica and then in Central and South America, as.a result
of a Spanish translation by Sefior Don Mariano Montealegre of
my 1935-lecture to the Royal Society of Arts to which reference
has already been made. This was widely read in all parts of Latin
America: the lecture drew attention to the vital necessity of organic
matter in the production of coffee in the New World. During the
next two years no less than seven Spanish translations of my papers ~
on humus were published in the Revista del Instituto de Defensa del
Café de Costa Rica. In January 1939 a special issue of the Revista
entitled En Busca del Humus (In Quest of Humus) appeared. This
was devoted to a collection of papers describing the Indore Process
‘and the various developments of the last eight years.
The marked response of coffee to humus in Africa, India, and
the New World suggested that the crop would prove to be a
‘ mycorrhiza-former. A number of samples’ of the surface roots of
_ coffee plants were duly collected in Travancore, Tanganyika, and
Costa Rica and sent home for examination. In all cases they
showed the mycorrhizal association.

. . TEA :
The East African results with coffee naturally suggested that
something should be done with regard to tcaa highly organized
plantation industry with the majority of the estates arranged in
‘ large groups, controlled by a small London Directorate largely
recruited from the industry itself. The problem was how best to ‘
approach such an organization. In 1934 my knowledge of tea and

: of the tea industry was of the slightest: I had never grown a tea
plant, let alone managed a tea plantation. I had only visited two
tea estates, one near Nuwara Eliya in Ceylon in 1908 and the other
near Dehra Dun in 1918. -I had, however, kept in touch with the
research work on tea, While I was debating this question Provi-

dence ‘came to my assistance in the shape of a request from a

mutual friend to help Dr. C. R. Harler (who had just been re-

[PAG 72]
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 57

trenched when the Tocklai Research Station, maintained by | the
Indian Tea Association, was reorganized in 1933) to find è new
and better opening, if possible one with more scope for indepen-
dent and original work. I renewed my acquaintance with Dr.
Harler and suggested he should take up the conversion into humus
of the waste products of tea estates. He was very interested and
shortly afterwards (August 1933) accepted the post of Scientific
Officer to the Kanan Devan Hills Produce Co. in the High Range,
Travancore, which was offered him by Messrs. James Finlay & Co.,
Ltd. On taking up his duties in this well-managed and highly
efficient undertaking, Dr. Harler secured the active interest of the
then General Manager, Mr. T. Wallace, and set to work to try
out the Indore Process on an estate scale at his head-quarters at
Nullatanni, near Munnar. No difficulties were met with in work-
ing the method: ample supplies of vegetable wastes and cattle
manure were available: the local labour took to the work and the
Estate Managers soon became enthusiastic.

On receipt of this information I made inquiries from Dr. H. H.
Mann, a former Chief Scientific Officer of the Indian Tea Associa-
tion, as to whether the live wires among the London Directorate
of the tea industry included anybody likely to -be particularly
interested in the humus question.

I was advised to see Mr. James Insch, one of the Managing ~
Directors of Messrs. Walter Duncan & Co. At Mr. Insch’s request
an illustrated paper of instructions for the use of the Managers of
the Duncan Group was drawn up in October 1934 and 250 copies.
were printed. The Directors of other groups of tea estates soon
began to consider the Indore Process and 4,000 further copies of
the paper of instructions were distributed. By the end of 1934
fifty-three estates of the Duncan Group in Sylhet, Cachar, the
Assam Valley, the Dooars, Terai, and the Darjeeling District had
made and distributed sample lots of humus, about 2,000 tons in
all. At the time of writing, December 1989, the estates of the
Duncan Group alone expect to make over 150,000 tons of humus
a year. Similar developments have occurred in a number of other
- groups notably on the estates controlled by Messrs. James Finlay
& Co., who have never lost the’ lead in manufacturing humus
which naturally followed from the pioneering work done by Dr.

[PAG 73]
58 THE INDORE PROCESS

Harler in Travancore. A good beginning has- been made. The
‘two strongest groups of tea estates in the East have become
compost-minded.
. It is exceedingly difficult to say exactly how much humus i is
being made at the present time on the tea estates of the British
Empire. It is possible only to give a very approximate figure. In
April 1938 Messrs. Masefield and Insch stated: ‘It is probably no
exaggeration to say that to-day a million tons of compost are being
made annually on the tea estates of India and Ceylon, and this
has been accomplished within a period of 5 years.’ Since this was
‘written the tea estates of Nyasaland and Kenya have also taken
up the Indore Process with marked success, |
These developments have been accompanied by a considerable -
_ amount of discussion. Two views have been and are still being
held on the best way of manuring tea. One school of thought, -
which includes the tea research institutes, considers, that as.the
yield of leaf is directly influenced by the supply of combined
nitrogen in the soil, the problem of soil fertility is so simple as to »
reduce itself to the use of the cheapest form of artificial manure—
in this case sulphate of ammonia. This view is naturally vigorously
_supported by the artificial manure interests. The results obtained
with sulphate of ammonia on small plots at Tocklai and Borbhetta
are triumphantly brought forward to clinch the argument which
amounts to this: that tea can be grown on a conveyor-belt lubri-
‘ cated by chemical fertilizers. The weaknesses ofsuch an argument -
are obvious. These small plots do not represent anything in the
’ tea industry: they only represent themselves. It is impossible to‘
run a small plot or to manufacture and sell its produce as a tea-
garden is conducted. In other words the small plot is not practical
politics. Again, land like Tocklai and Borbhetta which responds
so markedly to sulphate of ammonia must be badly farmed, other-
wise artificials would not prove so potent. The tendency all the
world over is that as the soil becomes more fertile artificials pro-
duce less and less result until the effect passes off altogether. Bad
farming and an experimental technique which will not hold water
are poor foundations on which to found a policy. The use of
replicated and randomized plots, followed by the higher mathe-
matics in interpreting the results of these small patches of land,

[PAG 74]
. Ù
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF THE INDORE PROCESS — 59

can do nothing to repair the fundamental unsoundness of the
Tocklai procedure. It stands self-condemned. Further, the advo-
cates of: sulphate of ammonia: for the tea plant seem to have
forgotten that a part at least of the extra yield obtained with this
manure may be due to an increase in soil acidity. Tea, as is well
known, needs an acid soil: sulphate of ammonia increases acidity.

The humus school of thought takes the view that what matters
in tea is quality and a reserve of soil fertility such as that created
by the primeval forest: that this can only be obtained by freshly
prepared humus made from vegetable and animal wastes and by
the correct use of shade trees, green-manure crops, and the preven-
tion of soil erosion. The moment the tea soils can be made really
fertile, the supply of nitrogen to the plant will take care of itself
and there will be no need to waste money in securing the fleeting
benefits conferred by artificials. The problem therefore of the
manuring of tea is not so much the effect of some dressing on the
year’s yield but the building up of a store of fertility. In this way
the manurial problem and the stability of the enterprise as a going
concern become merged into one. It is impossible to separate the
profit and loss account and the balance-sheet of a composting
programme because the annual dressings of humus influence both.

It will be interesting to watch the results of this struggle in a
great plantation industry. At the moment a few of the strongest
and most successful groups are taking up humus and spend little
or nothing on artificials, Other companies, on the other hand,

+ are equally convinced that their salvation lies in the use of cheap
chemical fertilizers. Between these two extremes a middle course
is being followed—humus supplemented by artificials. Mother
earth, rather than the advocates of these various views, will in
due course deliver her verdict.

Can the tea plant itself throw any light on this controversy or
is it condemned to play a merely passive role in such a contest?
Has the tea bush anything to say about its own preference? If it
has, its representations must at the very least be carefully con-

* sidered. The plant or the animal will answer most queries about
its needs if the question is properly posed and if its response is
carefully studied.

During the early trials of the Indore Process it became apparent

[PAG 75]
60 © THE INDORE PROCESS

“that the tea plant had something very interesting to communicate
on the humus question. Example after example came to my notice
where such small applications of compost as five tons to the acre
were at once followed by a marked improvement in growth, in
general vigour and in resistance to disease. Although very grati-

*. fying, in one sense these results were somewhat disconcerting. If
humus acts only indirectly by increasing: the fertility of the soil,
time will be needed for the various physical, biological, and
chemical changes to take place. If the plant responds at once,
some other factor besides an improvement in fertility must be at
work. What could this factor be?

In a circular letter issued on October 7th, 1937, to correspon-
dents in the tea industry, I suggested that the most obvious -
explanation of any sudden improvement in tea, observed after

‘ one application of compost, is the effect of humus in stimulating
the mycorrhizal relationship which is known to occur in the roots
of this crop. -

In the course of a recent tour (November 1 1937 to February ~
1938) to tea estates in-the East, 1 examined the root system of a _
number of tea plants which had been manured with properly ©
made compost, and found everywhere the same thing—numerous:
tufts of healthy-looking roots associated with rapidly developing
foliage and twigs much above the average. Both below and above

‘ground humus was clearly leading to a marked condition of well-

being. When the characteristic tufts of young roots were examined |
- microscopically, the cortical cells were seen to be literally overrun .
with mycelium and to a much greater extent than is the rule in
a really serious infection by a parasitic fungus. Clearly the.
mycorrhizal relationship was involved. These necessarily hasty
and imperfect observations, made in the field, were soon con-
. firmed and extended by Dr. M. C. Rayner and Dr. Ida Levisohn,
who examined a large number of. my samples including a few in
which artificials only were used, or where the soils were completely
exhausted and the garden had become derelict with perhaps only
half the full complement of plants. In these cases the characteristic’
tufts of healthy roots were not obseryed; root development and
growth were both defective; the mycorthizal relationship was
either absent or poorly developed. Where artificials were used

[PAG 76]
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 61

on worn-out tea, infection by brownish hyphae of a Rhizoctonia-
like fungus (often associated with mild parasitism). was noticed.
Whenever the roots of tea, manured with properly made compost, -
were critically examined, the whole of the cortical tissues of the
young roots always showed abundant endotrophic mycorrhizal
infection, the mainly intracellular mycelium apparently belonging
+ to one fungus. The fungus was always confined to the young roots
and no extension of the infection to old -roots was observed. In
the invaded cells the mycelium exhibits a regular cycle of changes
from invasion to the clumping of the hyphae around the cell
_ nuclei, digestion and disintegration of their granular contents,
‘and the final disappearance of the products from the cells.
Humus in the soil therefore affects the tea plant direct by means
of a middleman—the mycorrhizal relationship. Nature has pro-
vided an interesting piece of living machinery for joining up a
fertile soil with the plant. Obviously we must pay the closest
attention to the response—as regards yield, quality, and disease
resistance—which follows the use of this wonderful bit of mecha-
nism. We must also see that the humus content of the-soil is such
that the plant can make the fullest possible use ofits own machinery.
‘The mycorrhizal relationship in tea and its obvious bearing on
the nutrition of the plant places the manurial problems of this crop
on a new plane—that of applied biology. The well-being of the
tea. plant does not depend on the cheapest form of nitrogen but on
humus and the consequences of the mycorrhizal relationship. We
are obviously dealing with a forest plant which thrives best on
living humus—not on the dead by-product of a factory.”
It is easy to test the correctness of this view. It-can be done in
‘two ways: (1) by a comparison of tea seedlings grown on sub-soil
(from which the surface soil containing humus has been removed)
and manured either with a complete artificial mixture or with
freshly prepared humus, and (2) by observing the effect of artifi-
cials on a tea-garden where the soil is really fertile. Such trials
have already been started. In the case of seedlings grown on sub-
soil manured with: (1) 20 tons of humus to the acre, or (2) the
equivalent amount of NPK in the form of artificials, Mr. Kenneth
Morford has obtained some very interesting results at Mount
Vernon in Ceylon. Nine months after sowing, the humus plot

[PAG 77]
62 . THE INDORE PROCESS ©

was by far the better—the plants were ro inches high, branched,
. with abundant, healthy, dark green foliage. The plots with artifi-
* cials were 6 inches high, unbranched, with sparse, unhealthy, pale
foliage. An examination of the root systems was illuminating.
The humus plants developed a strong tap root 12 inches long; the
artificials plot showed little attempt to develop any tap root at all,
only extensive feeding roots near the surface. The root system at °
once explained why the humus plot resisted drought and why the
artificial manure plot was so dependent on watering. Mr. Mor-
ford’s experiment should be repeated in some of the other tea -
areas of the East. The results will speak for themselves and will
need no argument.

The effect of sulphate of ammonia on a really fertile soi] is most
interesting. As would ‘be expected the results have been for the
most part almost negative, because there is no limiting factor in
the shape of a deficiency of nitrogen, phosphorus, or potash under
such conditions. On old. estates, where organic matter has not
been regularly replaced, resulting in the loss of much of the original
fertility, such an experiment would give a clear indication as to
whether, under existing management, the soil is losing, maintain-
ing, or gaining in fertility. Given an adequate supply of humus in
the soil, the mycorrhizal relationship and ‘the nitrification’ of
organic matter, when allowed to work at top speed, are all that
the plant needs to produce a full crop of the highest quality pos-
sible under local conditions. The tea plant therefore is already
preparing its own evidence in the suit—Humus versus Sulphate
of Ammonia.

* The problem of the manuring of tea is. straighiforward. It
consists in converting the mixed vegetable wastes of a tea estate
and of the surrounding land into humus by means of the urine
and dung of an adequate herd of live stock—cattle, pigs, or goats.
As the tea districts are situated in regions of high rainfall it will be
necessary in many cases to protect the heaps or pits from heavy
rain. Ample vegetable waste must also be provided. The solution
of the practical problems involved will necessarily depend on local
conditions. At Gandrapara in the Dooars, an-estate influenced
by the south-west monsoon, Mr. J. C. Watson has set about the
provision of an ample supply of humus in a very thorough-going

[PAG 78]
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 63

manner, an account of which will be found in Appendix A (p. 225).
It cannot fail to interest not only the producers oftea but the whole
of the plantatioa industries as well.

The conversion of vegetable and animal wastes into humus is
only oné aspect of the soil-fertility problem of a tea-garden. There
are a number of others such as the use of shade trees, drainage,
prevention of erosion, the best manner of utilizing tea prunings
and green-manure, the utilization of water-weeds like the water
hyacinth, the treatment of root disease, the raising of seed,
the manufacture of humus from vegetable wastes only, and the
effect of artificial manures on the quality of tea. These will
now be briefly discussed.

Generally speaking, more attention is paid to shade trees in
North-East India than in South India and Ceylon. There is a
tendency for shade to decrease as one proceeds south. It may be
that the factor which has determined the invariable use of shade
in North-East India is the intense dryness and heat of the period
March to June which does not occur in the south. As, however,
tea is a forest plant and tea-growing must always be looked upon
as applied forestry, it would seem to be'a mistake to reduce shade
too much. The organic matter provided by the roots and leaves
of the shade trees, the protection they afford the soil from the sun,
wind, and rain, and the well-known advantage of mixed cropping
must all be very important factors in the maintenance of fertility.
This is borne out’ by the superior appearance of the tea on well-
shaded estates in Ceylon compared with that on land alongside”
where the shade trees have been removed. .

A large amount of the vegetable wastes on a tea estate consists
‘of prunings and green-manure plants. These are either forked in,
buried in long shallow trenches, or made into humus.’ Is there
any more effective method of dealing with these wastes? When
the tea is pruned the plant makes a new bush. Could it not be
induced to re-make a portion of its root system at the same time
in well-aerated rich soil? I think it could. On estates provided
with adequate shade and contour drains, the following two
methods of composting tea prunings and green-manure might be
tried out:

1. This material should be forked in with a dressing of compost

[PAG 79]
64 THE INDORE PROCESS ©

at the rate of 5 to 10 tons an acre. Decay will then be much more
rapid and effective than is now the case. This method of the
sheet composting of tea prunings has been tried out and found
successful at Gandrapara (p. 227).

_2. The prunings and green-manure should be composted i in
small pits between alternate rows of tea. The pits should be 2 feet
long and 13 feet wide and g inches to a foot deep, parallel to
the drains or contour drains and so arranged that the roots of
every tea plant come in contact with one pit only. The pits are
then nearly half filled with mixed tea and green-mafure prunings,
which are then covered with a thin layer of compost or cattle
manure. More green material is added until the pit is hearly full.
It is then covered with three inches of soil. The pits now become,

* small composting chambers; humus is produced while the tea is
not growing a crop; earthworms are encouraged; the roots of the
neighbouring tea plants soon invade the pit; a portion of the root
system of all the tea plants of the area is then re-created in highly
fertile, permeable soil. When the pruned bushes need tipping on
estates where the first picking is not manufactured, another set of
similar pits can be made in the vacant spaces between the first
pits in each line and similarly filled.

When next the bushes are pruned exactly the same procedure .
can be carried out in the hitherto undisturbed spaces between the
tows of tea.

When the fourth set of pits has been made éach tea bush will
have completed the re-creation ofa large portion of its root system
in rich earth.

The first large-scale trial of the pit method was begun at Mount
Vernon in Ceylon in January 1938. The results have been satis-
factory in all respects: the yield of tea has increased: the plants
have résisted drought: the cost of the work has proved to be a
.sound investment.

On several tea estates in Assam the low-lying areas among the
tea are used for the growth of water hyacinth for the compost
heaps. When this material forms a quarter to a third of the volume
of the heap, watering duririg the dry season can be reduced very
considerably. About three-quarters of the weed is harvested, the
remainder being left to produce the next year’s crop. As water

[PAG 80]
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 65

hyacinth is known to diminish the number of mosquitoes it
might pay a tea estate from the point of view of malaria control
only to grow this plant for composting on all low-lying areas.

When water hyacinth becomes widely cultivated on the tea estates
for humus manufacture, the labour employed will undoubtedly
carry the news to the great rice areas of North-East India. Here
one of the greatest advances in food production in the world can
be achieved by the conversion of water hyacinth first into
humus and then into rice.

In many of the tracts which produce tea small areas occur in
which the bushes are attacked by root disease. It is probable that
local soil pans, some distance below the surface, are holding up
the drainage and that this stagnant water lowers the natural
resistance of the tea plant. I suggested in the Report on my tour
that vertical pillar drains, filled with stones, pebbles, or even
surface soil, might prevent these troubles. Similar drains are used
in Sweden with good results.

The weakest link in the tea industry is the production of seed.
During the whole of my tour I saw few really well-managed seed
gardens. It is essential that the trees which bear seed should be
properly selected, adequately spaced, well drained, and manured
with freshly prepared compost. Nature will provide an automatic
method of seed control. If diseases appear on the trees or in the
seeds something is wrong. Only if the trees and seed are healthy,
vigorous, and free from pests, is the produce of such trees
fit for raising plants, which in China are said to last a hundred
years. The tea plant must have a good start in life.

In Ceylon particularly, attempts have been made to prepare
humus without animal wastes. The results have not fulfilled
expectation. The breaking down of such resistant material as the
leaves and prunings of tea is then unsatisfactory: the organisms
which synthesize humus are not properly fed: the residues of these
organisms which form an important part of the final humus lack
the contributions of the animal. No one has yet succeeded in
establishing an efficient and permanent system of agriculture
without, live stock. There is no reason therefore to suppose that
the tea industry will prove an exception to what, after all, is a rule
in Nature.

_F

[PAG 81]
66 . THE INDORE PROCESS

One of the most discussed topics in tea is the effect of artificial
manures on quality. The view is widely held that there has been
a gradual loss in quality since chemical manures were introduced.
One of the planters in the Darjeeling District, Mr. G. W. O’Brien,
the proprietor of the Goomtee and Jungpana Tea Estatés, who
continues to produce tea of the highest quality, informed me in
1935 that he had never used artificials since the estates came under
his management thirty-one years ago. The only manure used is
cattle manure and vegetable wastes—in other words, humus. .
The role of the mycorrhizal relationship in tea helps to provide
a scientific’ explanation of these results. There cah be little doubt
that this relationship will be found to influence the quality of tea
as well as the productivity and health of the bush. Humus and
the mycorrhizal relationship cannot of course create quality
where it never existed: the utmost these factors can achieve is to
restore that degree of quality which any locality possessed when_
first it was brought from forest under tea.

_ SUGAR-CANE
The waste products of the sugar-cane vary considerably. In
peasant agriculture where the whole of the megass is burnt for
evaporating the juice in open pans, the chief waste is old cane
leaves, cane stumps, and.the ashes left by the fuel. On the sugar
estates, a number of factory wastes must be added to the above
list—filter press cake, some unburnt megass, and the distillery
effluent left after thé manufacture of alcohol (known in Natal as
dunder). The main waste in both cases, however, is the old dead
leaves (cane trash), a very difficult material to turn into humus on
account of its structure and its chemical composition.
Before the advent of artificial fertilizers, it was the custom on
- sugar estates to maintain animals—mules and oxen—for transport,
and for cultivation. Thesé animals were bedded down with cane
trash, and a rough farm-yard manure—known in the West Indies
. as pen manure—was obtained with the help of their wastes. Soon
after the introduction of artificial manures, the value of this product »
began to be assessed on the basis of chemical analysis. Compari-
sons were made between the cost of production of its content of
NPK and that of an equivalent amount of these chemical elements

[PAG 82]
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 67

‘ in the form of artificial manure. The result was chemicals soon
began to displace pen manure: the animal came to be regarded
as an expensive luxury. The-advent of the tractor and the motor- .
lorry settled the question. Why kcep expensive animals like mules
and oxen which have to be fed from the land when their work can
be done more cheaply by machines and imported fucl? Tlie
decision to give up animals and farm-yard manure altogether _
naturally followed because the clearest possible evidence—that of
the profit and loss account—was available. Such false reasoning
is, alas, only too common in agriculture.

The reaction of the sugar-cane crop itself to this change in-
manuring was interesting. Two things happened: (1) insect and
fungous diseases increased; (2) the varicties of cane showed a
marked tendency to run out. These difficulties were met by a
constant stream of new seedling varieties. In contrast to this

* behaviour of the cane on the large estates is that of the same crop

grown by the cultivators of northern India where the only manure
used is cattle manure and.where there is practically no discase
and no running out of varieties. The indigenous canes of the

United Provinces have been grown for twenty centuries without
any help from mycologists, entomologists, or plant breeders.

Why does a variety of cane run out and why does it fall a prey
to disease? Sugar-cane is propagated vegetatively from cuttings.
When the btids from which the new canes arise are grown with
natural manure in India, the variety to all intents and purposes is
permanent. On the sugar estates, however, when the buds are
raised with chemicals the variety is short-lived. There must be
some simple explanation of this difference in behaviour.

What happened in the early days of the sugar estates before
the advent of chemicals and before new seedling canes were dis-
covered? In the West Indies, for example, until the last decade
of the last century the Bourbon variety was practically the only
kind grown. There was little dr no disease and this old varicty
showed no tendency to run out. ‘The experience of the cultivators

_of the United Provinces of India has therefore been repeated on
the estates themselves.

The simplest explanation of the breakdown of cane varictics
is that artificials do not really suit the cane and that they lead to

[PAG 83]
68 THE INDORE PROCESS ©

incipient malnutrition. If this is so the synthesis of carbohydrates
and proteins will be slightly imperfect: each generation of the
cane will start somewhat below par. The process will eventually
end in a cane with a distinct loss in vegetative vigour and unable to
resist the onslaughts of the parasite. In other words, the variety
will have run out.

This hypothesis will be transformed into something approach-
ing a principle if it can be proved that the cane is a mycorrhiza-
former and is nourished in two ways: (1) by the carbohydrates and
proteins synthesized in the green leaves. and (2) by the direct
digestion of fungous mycelium in the roots.

Steps were taken during 1938 and 1939 to have the-roots of
sugar-cane examined in order to test this point of view. Material
was obtained from India, Louisiana, and Natal. In all cases the
roots exhibited the mycorrhizal association. The large amount of

‘material sent from Natal included canes grown with artificials.
only, with humus only, and with both. The results were illumi-
nating. Humus is followed by the establishment of abundant
mycorrhiza and the rapid digestion of the fungus by the roots of
the cane. Artificials tend either to eliminate the association alto-
gether or to prevent the digestion of the fungus by the roots of the
cane. These results suggest that the change over from pen manure
to artificials is at the root of the diseases of the cane and is the cause
of the running out of the variety. We are dealing with the conse-

© quences of incipient malnutrition—a condition now becoming
very general all over the world in many other crops besides sugar-
cane.

These observations leave little doubt that the future policy in
cane-growing must be the conversion of cane trash and other
wastes into humus. The difficulty in composting cane trash, how-
ever, is to start the fermentation and-then to maintain it. The
leaves are armour-plated and do not easily absorb water. Further,
the material is low in nitrogen (about 0-25 per cent.) while the
ash (7-3 per cent. of the mass) contains 62 per cent. of silica. The
micro-organisms which manufacture humus find it difficult to
start on such refractory material. The problem is how best to

“help them in their work: (1) by getting the trash to absorb water,
and (2) by providing them with as much easily fermentable

[PAG 84]
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 69

vegetable matter as possible. Molasses where available can be
used to help the fermentation. If humus of the highest quality is
to be synthesized ari adequate supply of urine and dung must also
be provided, otherwise a product without the accessory growth
substances will result. Given a reasonable supply of urine and

Avail.
Total | able
K,0 | 5,0

TABLE 2
Composting cane trash in Natal

Composted with
1. Kraal manure . ST.
2. Filter cake ST.
3. Kraal manure and
filter cake S.T.
4. Kraal manure, filter
cake, and molasses T. ST.
5. Dunder . . o52 | 0-30
n Kraal manure, filter
cake, ammonium
sulphate, and potas-
sium sulphate 0:72 | 0-49
7. Farm composts with
available materials ST.
8. Farm composts with
available materials ST.
9. Farm composts with
available materials ST.
10. Farm composts with
available materials S.T.
rt. Farm composts with
available materials

dung and sufficient easily fermentable vegetable wastes like green-
manure, there is no reason why cane trash and the other wastes of
a sugar plantation cannot be made into first-class humus and why
a sugar estate should not be made to manure itself. The conditions
which must be fulfilled are clear from the work already done.
Dymond has shown that before composting, cane trash must be
allowed to weather a little: the weathered leaves must then be
kept moist from the start. In this way the fungi and bacteria are
greatly assisted. Filter press cake, dunder, and other wastes all
help in the process of conversion, as will be seen from the results
of his various experiments carried out in 1938 in Natal (Table 2).

[PAG 85]
70 THE INDORE PROCESS

These results are similar to and confirm those obtained by
Tambe and Wad at Indore in 1935. In Natal it is estimated that
100 tons of stripped cane will yicld about 40 tons of compost con-
taining about 280 Ib. of nitrogen and 160 Ib. of phosphoric acid.

The main difficulty in composting cane trash must always be
the correction of its wide carbon : nitrogen ratio. The problem is
a practical onc—how best to bring the various wastes together in
the cheapest way and then distribute the finished humus to the
land. Obviously there can be no hard-and-fast procedure. The
correct solution of the problem will vary with the locality: the
work is such that it can only be done by the man on the spot.

The sugar estates of the future will in all probability gradually
become self-supporting as regards manure. After a time no money
will be spent on artificials. The change over from present methods
of manuring will, however, take time, and at first a sufficient
volume of high-quality humus will be out of the question because
the animals maintained will be too few.

What is the best way of using the small amount of humus that
can be made at the beginning? This is a very important matter.
I suggest that it should be devoted to the Jand on which the plant
matcrial is grown. These canes should be raised in trenches on
the Shahjahanpur principle (sec Chapter XIV) and every care
should be taken to maintain the acration of the soil during the
whole life of the crop. The trenches should be well cultivated and
manured with freshly prepared humus, at least three months
before planting. These cancs should be regarded as the most
important on the estate, and no pains should be spared to produce
the best possible material. Whether or not immature cane should
continue to be planted is a question for the future. What is certain
is that cane to be planted should be really well grown in a soil
rich in freshly prepared humus. Each crop must start properly.
As the supply of organic matter increases on the sugar estates the
- methods found to give the best results in growing these canes can
be extended to the whole estate.

- That the above is possible is clear from a study of the work that
has been done in India and Natal. In March 1998 Dymond con-
cluded a careful survey of the whole problem in the following
words:

[PAG 86]
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 71

‘Artificials are easy of application, easily purchased in good times,
or not bought at all when times are bad; they form a never-ending
topic of conversation with one’s neighbours, a source of argument with
the vendors; they are a duty and a sop to one’s conscience; whereas
humus means more labour, more attention, transport and trouble.
Nevertheless, humus is the basis of permanent agriculture, artificials
the policy of the here to-day and gone to-morrow.’

COTTON

Before taking up research on cotton at the newly founded
Institute of Plant Industry at Indore in 1924, a survey of cotton
growing in the various parts of India was undertaken. At the
same time the research work in progress on this crop was critically
examined.

The two most important cotton-growing areas in India are:
(1) the black cotton soils of the Peninsula, which are derived from
the basalt; (2) the alluvium of North-West India, the deposits left
by the rivers of the Indo-Gangetic plain.

In‘the former there are thousands of examples which indicate
beyond all doubt the direction research on this crop should take.
All round the villages on the black cotton soils, zones of highly
manured land rich in organic matter occur. Here cotton does
well no matter the season: the plants are well grown and free from
pests: the yield of seed cotton is high. On the similar but un-
manured land alongside the growth is comparatively poor: only
in years of well distributed rainfall is the yield satisfactory. The
limiting factor in growth is the development, soon after the rains
set in, of a colloidal condition which interferes with aeration and
impedes percolation. This occurs on all black soils, but organic
matter mitigates the condition.

On the alluvium of North-West India, a similar limiting factor
occurs. Here cotton is grown on irrigation, which first causes the
fine soil particles to pack and later on to form colloids. In duc
course the American varieties in particular show by their growth
that they are not quite at home. The anthers often fail to function
properly, the plants arc unable to set a full crop of seed, the ripen-
ing period is unduly prolonged, and the fibre lacks strength,
quality, and life. The cause of this trouble is again poor soil acra-
tion, which appears in these soils to lead to a very mild alkali

[PAG 87]
72 . _ THE INDORE PROCESS

condition. This, in turn, prevents the cotton crop from absorbing
sufficient water from the soil. One of the easiest methods of pre-
venting this packing is by assisting the soil to form compound
particles with the help of dressings of humus.