=== An Agricultural Testament - Albert Howard.pdf — CHUNK 9/14 ===
Chars: 44,915 | Offset: 356,932



(c) The use of artificial manures, particularly sulphate of
ammonia. The presence of additional combined nitrogen in an
easily assimilable form stimulates the growth of fungi and other
organisms which, in the search for the organic matter meeded for
energy and for building up microbial tissue, use up first the
reserve of soil humus and then the more resistant organic matter
which cements the soil particles. Ordinarily this glue is not_
affected by the processes going on in a normally cultivated soil,
but it cannot withstand the same processes when stimulated by
dressings of artificial manures.

Alkali land therefore starts with a soil in which the oxygen-
supply is permanently cut off. Matters then go from bad to worse

‘ very rapidly. All the oxidation factors which are essential for
maintaining a healthy. soil cease. A new soil flora—composed of
anaerobic organisms which obtain their oxygen from the sub-
stratum—is established. A reduction phase ensues. The easiest
source of oxygen—the nitrates—is soon exhausted. The organic
matter then undergoes anaerobic fermentation. Sulphuretted
hydrogen is produced as the soil dies, just as in the lakes'of Central
Asia. The final result of the chemical changes that take place is
the accumulation of the soluble salts of alkali Jand—the sulphate,
chloride, and carbonate of sodium. When these salts are present
in injurious amounts they appear on the surface in the form of
snow-white and brownish-black incrustations. The former (white
alkali) consists largely of the sulphate and chloride of sodium, and
the latter (the dreaded black alkali) contains sodium carbonate in
addition and owes its dark colour to the fact that this salt is able
to dissolve the organic matter in the soil and produce physical con-
ditions which render drainage impossible. According to Hilgard,
sodium carbonate is formed from the sulphate and chloride in the
presence of carbon dioxide and water. The action is reversed
in the presence of oxygen. -Subsequent investigations have

‘ modified this view and have shown that the formation of sodium
carbonate in soil takes place in stages. The appearance of
this salt always marks the end of the chapter. The soil is dead.
Reclamation then becomes difficult on account of the physical

[PAG 179]
152 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

conditions set up by these alkali salts and the dissolved organic
matter.

The occurrence of alkali land, as would be expected from its
origin, is extremely irregular. When ordinary alluvial soils like
those of the Punjab and Sind are brought under perennial irriga-
tion, small patches of alkali first appear where the soil is heavy;
on stiffer areas the patches are large and tend to run together. On
open permeable stretches, on the other hand, there is no alkali.
In tracts like the Western Districts of the United Provinces, where
irrigation ‘has been the rule for a long period, zones of well-
aerated land carrying fine irrigated crops occur alongside the
barren alkali tracts. Iraq also furnishes interesting examples of
the connexion between alkali and poor soil aeration. Intensive
cultivation under irrigation is only met with in that country where
the soils are permeable and the natural drainage is good. Where.
the drainage and aeration are poor, the alkali condition at once
becomes acute. There are, of course, a number of irrigation
schemes, such as the staircase cultivation of the Hunzas in north-
west India and of Peru, where the land has been continually
watered from time immemorial without any development of
alkali salts.' In Italy and Switzerland perennial irrigation has
been practised for long periods without harm to the soil. In all
such cases, however, careful attention has been paid to drainage
and aeration and to the maintenance of humus; the soil processes ©
have been confined by Nature or by man to the oxidative phase;
the cement of’ the compound particles has been protected by
keeping up a sufficiency of organic matter.

. Every possible gradation in alkali land is met with. Minute
quantities of alkali salts in the soil have no injurious effect on
crops or on the soil organisms. It is only when the proportion
increases beyond a certain limit that they first interfere with
growth and finally prevent it altogether. Leguminous crops are
particularly sensitive to alkali especially when this contains carbon-
ate of soda. The action of alkali salts on the plant is a physical
one and depends on the osmotic pressure of solutions, which in-
creases with the amount of the dissolved substance. For water to
pass readily from the suil into the roots of plants, the osmotic
pressure of the cells of the root must be considerably greater than

[PAG 180]
SOME DISEASES OF THE SOIL 153

that of the soil solution outside. Ifthe soil solution became stronger
than that of the cells, water would pass backwards from the roots
‘to the soil and the crops would dry up. This state of affairs
naturally occurs when the soil becomes charged with alkali salts
beyond a certain point. The crops are then unable to take up
water and death results. The roots behave like a plump straw-
berry when placed in a strong solution of sugar. Like the straw-
berry they shrink in size because they have lost water to the
stronger solution outside. Too much’salt in the water therefore
‘makes irrigation water useless and destroys the canal as a com-
mercial proposition.

The reaction of the crop to the first stages in alkali production
is interesting. For twenty years at Pusa and eight years in the
Quetta Valley I had to farm land, some of which hovered, as it
were, on the verge of alkali. The first indication of the condition
is a darkening of the foilage and the slowing down of growth.

_ Attention to soil aeration, to the supply of organic matter, and to
the use of deép-rooting crops like lucerne and pigeon pea, which
break up the sub-soil, soon sets mattersright. Disregard of Nature’s
danger signals, however, leads to trouble—a definite alkali patch
is formed. When cotton is grown under canal irrigation’ on the |
alluvial soils of the Punjab, the reaction of the plant to incipient
alkali is first shown by the failure to set seed, on account of the ‘
fact that the anther, the most sensitive portion of the flower, fails
to function and to liberate its pollen. The cotton plant naturally
finds it difficult to obtain from mild alkali soil all thé water it
needs—this shortage is instantly reflected in the breakdown of the

‘ floral mechanism. .

The theory of the reclamation of alkali land is very simple. All
that is needed, after treating the soil with sufficient gypsum (which

. transforms the sodium clays into calcium clays), is to wash out the
soluble salts, to add organic matter, and then to farm the land
properly. Such reclaimed soils are then exceedingly fertile and
remain so. If sufficient water is available it is sometimes possible
to reclaim alkali soils by washing only. I once confirmed this
The berm of a raised water channel at the Quetta Experiment
Station was faced with rather heavy soil from an alkali patch.
The ‘constant passage of the irrigation water down the water

[PAG 181]
154 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

channel soon removed the alkali salts:” This soil then produced
some of the heaviest crops of grass I have ever seen in the tropics.
When, however, the attempt is made to reclaim alkali areas on a
field scale, by flooding and draining, difficulties at once arise unless
steps are taken first to replace all the sodium in the soil complex
by calcium and then to prevent the further formation of sodium
clays. Even when these reclamation methods succeed, the’ cost
is always considerable; it soon becomes prohibitive; the game is
not worth the candle. The removal of the alkali salts is only the
first step; large quantities of organic matter are then needed;
adequate.soil aeration must be provided; the greatest care must
be taken to preserve these reclaimed soils and to see that no
reversion to the alkali condition occurs. It is exceedingly easy
under canal irrigation to create alkali salts on certain areas. It is
exceedingly difficult to reverse the process and to transform alkali
Jand back again into a fertile soil.

Nature has provided, in the shape of alkali salts, a very effective
censorship for all schemes of perennial irrigation. ‘The conquest

of the desert, by means of the canal, by no means depends on the ~

mere provision of water and arrangements for the periodical
floodirîig of the surface. This is only one of the factors of the
problem. The water must be used in such a manner and the soil
‘management must be such that the fertility of the soil is maintained
intact. There is obviously no point in creating, at vast expense, a

Canal Colony and producing crops for a generation or’ two,

followed by a desert of alkali land. Such an achievement merely
provides another example of agricultural banditry. It must always

be remembered that the ancient irrigators never developed any -

efficient method of perennial irrigation, but were content with the
basin system,! a device by which irrigation and soil aeration can
be combined. In his studies on irrigation and drainage, King
concludes an interesting discussion of this question in the following

words, which deserve the fullest consideration on the part of the ©

irrigation authorities all over the world:

‘It isa noteworthy fact that the excessive development of alkalis in
India, as well as in Egypt and California, is the result of irrigation

1 The land is embanked; watered once; when dry enough it is cultivated and sown.
In this way water can be provided without any interference with soil aeration. .

[PAG 182]
SOME DISEASES OF THE SOIL 155

practices modern in their origin and modes and instituted by people
lacking in the traditions of the ancient irrigators, who had worked these
same lands thousands of years before. ‘The alkali lands of to-day, in
their intense form, are of modern origin, due to practices which are
evidently inadmissible, and which in all probability were known to be
so by the people whom our modern civilization has supplanted.’

.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

SOIL EROSION
Gorrm, R. M. ‘The Problem of Soil Erosion in the British Empire, with special
reference to India’, Journal of the Royal Society of Arts, Ixxxvi, 1938, p. got.
Howarp, Sir ALBERT. ‘A Note on the Problem of Soil Erosion’, Journal of the Royal
Society of Arts, bocxvi, 1938, p. 926.
acs, G. V., and Wiryre, R. O. Erosion and Soil Conservation, Bulletin 25, Imperial
Bureau of ‘Pastures and Forage Crops, Aberystwyth, 1938.
. ———— The Rage of the Earth: A World Survey of Soil Erosion, London, 1939. .
Soils and Men, Year Book of Agriculture, 1938, U.S. Dept. of Agr., Washington, DG.
- 1938.

ALKALI SOILS
Hiroaro, E, Ww. Soils, New York, 1906. hi
Howarn, A. Crop Production in India, Oxford University Press, 1924.
Kino, F. H. Irrigation and Drainagé, London, 1900.
Ossenpowsn1, F, Man and Mystery in Asia, London, 1924.
Russe, Sim Joun. Soil Conditions and Plant Growth, London, 1937.

[PAG 183]
CHAPTER XI

THE RETREAT OF THE CROP AND THE ANIMAL
BEFORE THE PARASITE

TL: the previous chapter we have seen how Nature, by means of |

soil erosion, removes any area of worn-out land and recreates
new soil in a fresh place. Mismanagement of the land is followed
later on by a New Deal, as it were, somewhere else. A similar
rule applies to crops: the diseased crop is quietly but effectively
labelled prior to removal for the manufacture of humus, so that
the next generation of plants may benefit.

Mother earth has provided a vast organization for indicating
the inefficient crop. Where the soil is infertile, where an unsuit-
able variety is being grown, or where some mistake has been made
in management, Nature at once registers her disapproval through
her Censors’ Department. One or more of the groups of parasitic
insects and fungi—the organisms which thrive on unhealthy living
matter—are told off to point out that farming has failed. In the
conventional language of to-day the crop is attacked by disease.
In the writings of the specialist, a case has arisen for the control of
a pest: a crop must be protected. ”

In recent years another form of disease—known as virus disease
—has made its appearance. There is no obvious parasite in virus -

-diseases, but insects among other agencies are‘able to transmit the

trouble from diseased to apparently healthy plants in the neigh-
bourhood. When the cell contents of affected plants are examined,
the proteins exhibit definite abnormalities, thereby suggesting
that the work of the green leaf is not effective; the synthesis of
albuminoids seems to be incomplete. With the development of
special research laboratories, like that at Cambridge, more and
more of these diseases are being discovered and a considerable
literature on the subject has arisen. -

The virus diseases do not complete the story. A certain number
of maladies occur in which the apparent cause is neither a fungus,
an insect, nor a virus. These are grouped under the general title—
physiological diseases: troubles arising from the collapse of the
normal metabolic processes. *

-

[PAG 184]
RETREAT OF CROP AND ANIMAL BEFORE THE PARASITE 157

How has agricultural-science dealt with the diseases of crops?
The answer is both interesting and ‘illuminating. The subject
has been approached in a variety of ways, which can be briefly
summed up under the following four heads:

1. The study of the life history of the pest, including the general
relation of the parasite to the crop and the influence of the environ-
ment on the struggle for supremacy between the two. The main
object of these investigations has been to discover some ‘possible
weakness in the life history of the pest which can be utilized to
destroy it or to protect the plant from infection. An impressive
volume of specialist literature has resulted. As the number of in-
vestigators grows and as their inquiries become more exhaustive
and tend to cover a rapidly increasing proportion of the earth’s
surface, there is a corresponding increase in the volume of print.
It is now almost impossible to take up any of the periodicals deal-
ing with agricultural research without finding at least one long
illustrated article describing some new disease. So vast has the
literature become that the specialists themselves are unable to
cope with it. Most of it can only be read by the workers in
abstract, for which again new agencies have been created in the
British Empire—the Imperial Bureaux of Entomology and Myco-
logy—bodies which act as clearing-houses of information and deal
with-the published papers in a way reminiscent of the methods of
the Banker’s Clearing House in dealing with cheques.

2. Thestudy of the natural parasites of insect pests, the breeding
of these animals, and their actual introduction whenever this pro-
cedure promises success. A separate institution for this purpose
has been founded at Farnham Royal in Buckinghamshire.

3. The protection of the crop from the inroads of the parasite.
As a rule this takes two forms: (1) the discovery of insecticides
and fungicides and the design of the necessary machinery for
covering the crop with a thin film of poison which will destroy the
parasite in the resting stage or before it can gain entry to the host;
(2) the destruction of the parasite by burning, by the use of corro-
sive liquids like strong sulphuric acid, or by germicides added to
the soil so that the amount of infecting material will be negligible.

4. The framing and conduct of regulations to protect an area
from some foreign pest which has not yet made its appearance. ©

[PAG 185]
‘ 158 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

These follow the usual methods of quarantine. Importation: of
plants and seeds is prohibited altogether, introduction is permitted
under licence, or the plant material is inspected and fumigated at
the port of entry. The principle in all cases is the same—the crops,
must be protected from chance infection by some foreign parasite
which might cause untold damage. As traffic by land, sea, and
air grows in volume and becomes speeded up, it will be increas-.
ingly difficult to enforce these regulations. It is impossible even
now to inspect’all luggage and all merchandise and to prevent
the smuggling of small packets of seed or cuttings of living plants.
Indeed, if an investigation were to be made of the personal effects
of the coolies passing backwards and forwards between India and
Burma, India and the Federated Malay States and Ceylon, it
would be seen what an extraordinary collection of articles these
men and women carry about and how frequently plants and seeds
are included. Enthusiasts in gardening often collect plants on their
travels which interest them. The population, live stock, and
factories of Great Britain are partly supplied with seeds from all
over the world. By one or other of these agencies a few new pests .
are almost certain from time to time to enter the country. These
quarantine methods therefore can never succeed.

More than fifty years have passed since the modern work on the
diseases of plants first began. What has been the general result of ,
all this study of vegetable pathology? Has it provided anything of ~
permanent value to agriculture? Is the game worth the candle?
Must agricultural science go on discovering more. and more new _
pests and devising more and more poison sprays to destroy them or
is there any alternative method of dealing with the situation?
Why is there so much of this disease? Can the growing tale of the
pests of Western agriculture be accounted for by some subtle
change in practice? Can the cultivators of the East, for example,
teach us anything about diseases and their control? |

In this chapter an attempt will be made to answer these interest-
ing questions. °

It is a well-understood principle in business that any organiza-
tion like agricultural research, which has grown by accretion
rather than by the development of a considered plan, stands in
need of a periodical critical examination to ascertain whether the

[PAG 186]
RETREAT OF CROP AND ANIMAL BEFORE THE PARASITE 159

results obtained correspond with the cost and whether any modi-
fications are needed in the light of new. knowledge and experience.
I began such an investigation of the plant and animal disease
section of agricultural science in 1899 and have steadily pursued
it since. After forty years’ work I feel sufficiently confident of my
general conclusions to place them on record, and to ask for them
to be considered on their merits.

I took up research in agriculture as 2 mycologist i in the West
Indies in 1899, where I specialized in the diseases of sugar-cane -.
and cacao and became interested in tropical agriculture. Almost
at once I discerned a fundamental weakness in the research organ- -
ization: the mycologist had no land on which he could take his
own advice about remedies before asking planters to adopt them.‘

My next post was botanist at Wye College in Kent, where I was
in charge of the experiments on hops and had ample opportunities
for studying the insect and fungous diseases of this interesting crop.”
But again I had no land on which I could try out certain ideas
that were fermenting in my mind about the prevention of hop
diseases. I observed one interesting thing: the increase in the
resisting power to infection of the young hop flower which resulted
from pollination. This observation has since brought about a
change in the local practice: the male hop is now cultivated and
ample pollination of the female flowers—the hops of commerce—
occurs.

In 1905 I was appointed Imperial Economic Botanist to the
Government of India. Atthe Pusa Agricultural Research Institute,
largely through the support of the Director, the late Mr. Bernard
Coventry, I had for the first time all the essentials for work—
interesting problems, money, freedom, and, last but not least,
75 acres of land on which I could grow crops in my own way and
study their reaction to insect and fungous pests and other things.
My real training in agricultural research then began—six years
after leaving the University and obtaining all the paper qualifica-
tions and academic experience then néeded by an investigator.

At the beginning of this second and intensive phase of my train-
ing, I resolved to break new ground and try out an idea (which
first occurred to me in the West Indies), namely, to observe what
happened when insect and fungous diseases were left alone and

[PAG 187]
160 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

allowed to develop unchecked, and where indirect methods only,
such as improved cultivation and more efficient varieties, were
employed to prevent attack. This point of view derived con-
siderable impetus from a preliminary study of Indian agriculture!
The crops grown by the cultivators in the neighbourhood of Pusa
were remarkably free from pests of ali kinds; such things as
insecticides and fungicides found no place in this ancient system of
agriculture. I decided that I could not do better than watch the

- operations of these peasants, and acquire their traditional know-
ledge as rapidly as possible. For the time being, therefore, I
regarded them as my professors of agriculture. Another group of
instructors were obviously the insects and fungi themselves. The
methods of the cultivators if followed would result in crops
practically free from disease; the insects and fungi would be useful
for pointing out unsuitable varieties and methods of farming
“inappropriate to the locality.

It was possible for me to approach the subject of plant diseases _
in this unorthodox manner for two reasons. In the first place the
Agricultural Research Institute at Pusa was little more than aname
when I arrived in India in 1905. Everything was fluid; there
was nothing in the nature of an organized system of research in
existence. In the second place, my duties, fortunately for me, had
not been clearly defined. I was therefore able to break new ground,
to widen the scope of economic botany until it became crop pro- .
duction, to base my investigations on a first-hand knowledge of
Indian agriculture, and to take my own advice before offering it
to other people. In this way I escaped the fate of the majority of
agricultural investigators—the life of a laboratory hermit devoted
to the service of an obsolete research organization. Instead, I
spent my first five years in India ascertaining by practical experi-
ence the principles underlying health in crops.

In order to give my crops every chance of being attacked by
parasites, nothing was done in the way of prevention; rio insecti-
cides and fungicides were used; no diseased material was ever
destroyed. As my understanding of Indian agriculture progressed,
and as my practice improved, a marked diminution of disease
occurred. At the end of five years’ tuition under my new pro-
fessors—the peasants and the pests—the attacks of insects and

[PAG 188]
RETREAT OF CROP AND ANIMAL BEFORE THE PARASITE 161

fungi on all crops, whose root systems were suitable to the local
soil conditions, became negligible. By 1910 I had learnt how
to grow healthy crops, practically free from disease, without
the slightest help from mycologists, entomologists, bacteriologists,
agricultural chemists, statisticians, clearing-houses of information,
artificial manures, spraying machines, insecticides, fungicides,
germicides, and all the other expensive paraphernalia of the
modern Experiment Station.

I then posed to myself the principles which appeared to underlie
~' the diseases of plants:

1. Insects and fungi are not the real cause of plant diseases but
only attack unsuitable varieties or crops imperfectly grown. Their
true role is that of censors for pointing out the crops that are
improperly nourished and so keeping our agriculture up to the
mark. In other words, the pests must be looked upon as Nature’s
professors of agriculture: as an integral portion of any rational
system of farming. —

2. The policy of protecting crops from pests by means of sprays,
‘powders, and so forth is unscientific and unsound as, even when
successful, such procedure merely preserves the unfit and obscures
the real problem—how to grow healthy crops.

3. The burning of diseased plants seems to be the unnecessary
destruction of organic matter as no such provision as this exists
in Nature, in which insects and fungi after all live and work.

' This preliminary exploration of the ground suggested that the
birthright of evety crop is health, and that the correct method of |
dealing with disease at an Experiment Station is not to destroy
the parasite, but to make use of it for tuning up agricultural
practice.

Steps were then taken to apply these principles to oxen, the
power unit in Indian agriculture. For this purpose it was necessary
to have the work cattle under my own charge, to design their
accommodation, and to arrange for their feeding, hygiene, and
management. At first this was refused, but after persistent im-
portunity, backed by the powerful support of the Member of the
Viceroy’s Council in charge of agriculture (the late Sir Robert
Carlyle, K.C.S.I.), I was allowed to have charge of six pairs of
oxen. I had little to learn in this matter as I belong to an old

M

[PAG 189]
162 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

agricultural family and was brought up on a farm which had made
for itself a local reputation in the management of cattle. My work
animals were most carefully selected and everything was done to
provide them with suitable housing and with fresh green fodder,
silage, and grain, all produced from fertile land. I was naturally
intensely interested in watching the reaction of these well-chosen
and well-fed oxen to diseases like rinderpest, septicaemia, and
foot-and-mouth disease which frequently devastated the country-
side.! None of my animals were segregated; none were inoculated;
they frequently came in contact with diseased stock: As my small
farm-yard at Pusa was only separated by a low hedge from one of
the large cattle-sheds on the Pusa estate, in which outbreaks of
foot-and-mouth disease often occurred, I have several times seen
my oxen rubbing noses with foot-and-mouth cases. Nothing
happened. The healthy well-fed animals reacted to this disease
exactly as suitable varieties of crops, when properly grown, did to
insect and fungous pests—no infection took place.

As the factors of time and place are important. when testing any
agricultural innovation, it now became necessary to try out the’
three principles referred to above over a reasonably long period
and in new localities. This was done during the next twenty-one
years at three centres: Pusa (1910-24); Quetta (summers of 1910
to 1918), and Indore (1924-31).

At Pusa, during the years 1910 to 1924, outbreaks of plant
diseases were rare, except on certain cultures with deep root
systems which were grown chiefly to provide a supply of infecting
material for testing the disease resistance of new ‘types obtained
by plant-breeding methods. Poor soil aeration always-encouraged
disease at Pusa. The unit species of Lathyrus sativus provided
perhaps the most interesting example of the connexion between
soil aeration and insect attack. These unit species fell into three
groups: surface-rooted types always immune to green-fly; deep- -
rooted types always heavily infected; types with intermediate
root system always moderately infected. These sets of cultures
were grown side by side year after.year in small oblong plots about

‘ 10 feet wide. The green-fly infection repeated itself each year

1 These epidemics are the result of starvation, due to the intense pressure of the
bovine population on the limited food-supply.

[PAG 190]
n

“

RETREAT OF CROP AND ANIMAL BEFORE THE PARASITE - 163

and was determined not by the presence ‘of the parasite, but by
the root development of the'host. Obviously the host had to be
in a certain condition before infection could take place. The
insect, therefore, was not the cause but the consequence of some-
thing else. -

One of the crops under study at Pusa was tobacco. At firsta

great many malformed plants—since proved to be due to virus—

made their appearance in my cultures. When care was devoted
to the details of growing tobacco seed, to the raising of the seedlings
in the nurseries, to transplanting and general’ soil management,
this virus disease disappeared altogether. It was very common ~
during the first three years; it then became infrequent; between

1910 and 1924 I never saw a single case. Nothing was done in the

way of prevention beyond good farming methods and the building

up of a fertile soil. I dismissed.it at the time as one of the many

mare’s nests of agricultural science—things which have no real

existence.

For a period of eight years, I was provided with a subsidiary
experiment station on the loess soils of the Quetta valley for the
study of the problems underlying fruit-growing and irrigation.
I observed no fungous disease of any importance in the dry climate
of the Quetta valley during the eight summers I spent there. In
the grape gardens, run by the-tribesmen on the well-drained
slopes of the valley, I never observed any diseases—insect or
fungous—on the grapes or on the vines, although they were.
planted on the floors of deep trenches, allowed to climb up the
earth walls and were frequently irrigated. At first sight, all the
conditions for mildew seemed to have been provided, yet I never
saw a single speck. Three favourable factors probably accounted
for this result. The climate was exceedingly dry, with considerable
air movement and cloudless skies; the soil made use of by the roots.
of the vine was open, well drained, and exceptionally well aerated ;
the only manure used was farm-yard manure. Growth, yield,
quality, and disease resistance left nothing to be desired.

The chief pest of fruit-trecs at Quetta was green-fly soon after
the young leaves appeared. This could be produced or avoided at
will by careful attention to cultivation and irrigation. Any inter-
ference with soil aeration brought on this trouble; anything which

[PAG 191]
164 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

promoted soil aeration. prevented it. I frequently produced a
strong attack of green-fly on peaches and almonds-by over-irriga-
tion during the winter and spring, and then stopped it dead by
deep cultivation. The young shoots were covered with the pest
below, but the upper portions of the same shoots were completély
healthy. The green-fly never spread from the lower to the upper
leaves on the same twig. The tribesnien got over the tendency of
these loess soils to pack under irrigation in a very simple way.
Lucerne was always grown in the fruit orchards, and regularly
top-dressed with farm-yard manure. In this way the porosity of _
the soil was maintained and the green-fly kept-in check.

At the Institute of Plant Industry, Indore, only two cases of
disease occurred during the eight years I was there. The first
occurred on a small field of gram (Cicer arietinum), about two-thirds
of which was flooded for a few days one July, due to the temporary
stoppage of one of the drainage canals which took storm water
from adjacent areas through the estate. A map of the flooded area
was made at the time. In October, about a month after sowing.
this plot was heavily attacked by the gram caterpillar, the insect-
infected area corresponding exactly with the inundation area.
The rest of the plot escaped infection and grew normally. The
insect did not spread to the other 50 acres of gram grown that year
alongside. Some change in the food of the caterpillar had obviously
been brought about by the alteration in the soil conditions caused
by the temporary flooding. The second case of disease occurred
‘ in a field of san hemp (Crotalaria juncea L.) intended for green-

manuring; however, this was not ploughed in but was kept for
seed. After flowering the crop was smothered by a mildew; no
seed was harvested. To produce a crop of seed of san on the black
soils, it is necessary to manure the land with humus or farm-yard
manure, when no infection takes place and an excellent crop of
seed is obtained.

One experiment with cotton unfortunately could not be arranged
‘in spite of all my efforts. At Indore there was a remarkable
absence of all insect and fungous diseases of cotton. Good soil
management, combined with dressings of humus, produced crops
which were practically immune to all the pests of cotton. When

È the question of protecting India from the various cotton boll-

:

[PAG 192]
RETREAT OF CROP AND ANIMAL BEFORE THE PARASITE 165

worms and boll-weevils from America was discussed, I offered
to have these let loose.among my cotton cultures at Indore in
order (1) to settle the question whether these troubles in the
U.S.A. were due to the insect or to the way the cotton was grown,
and (2) ‘to subject my farming methods to a crucial test. I am
pretty certain the insects would have found my cotton cultures
very indifferent nourishment. My proposal, however, did not
find favour with the entomological advisers of the Indian Cotton
Committee and the matter dropped.

. At Quetta and Indore there was no case of infectious disease
among the oxen. The freedom from disease observed at Pusa
was again experienced in the new localities—the Western Frontier
and Centrai India.

It was soon discovered in the course e of this work-that the thing
that matters most in crop production is a regular supply of well-
made farm-yard manure and that the maintenance of soil fertility
is the basis of health.

HUMUS AND DISEASE RESISTANCE -

‘Even on the ‘Experiment Stations the supply of farm-yard
manure was always insufficient. The problem was how to increase
it in a country where a good deal of the cattle-dung has to be
burnt for fuel. The solution of this problem was suggested by the
age-long practices of China. It involved the study of how best to
convert the animal and vegetable wastes into humus, so that every
holding in India could become self-supporting as regards manure.
Such a problem did not fall within my sphere of work—the
improvement of crops. It obviously necessitated a great deal of
chemical work under my personal control. The orgamzation of
research at Pusa had gradually become more rigid; the old latitude
which existed in the early days became a memory. That essential
freedom, without-which no progress is possible, had been gradually
destroyed by the growth of a research organization based on
fragments of science rather than on the practical problems which
needed investigation. The instrument became more important
than its purpose. Such organizations can only achieve their own
destruction. This was the reason why I decided to leave Pusa
and found a new centre where I should be free to follow the gleam

[PAG 193]
166 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

. unhampered and undisturbed. After a delay of six years, 1918 to
1924, the Indore Institute was founded. In due course a simple .
method, known as the Indore Process, of composting vegetable and _
animal wastes was devised, tested, and tried out on the 300 acres of
land at the disposal of the Institute of Plant Industry, Indore. In
a few years production more than doubled: the crops were to all
intents and purposes immune from disease. -

Since 1931 steps have been taken to get the Indore Process taken
up in a number of countries, especially by the plantation industries
such as coffee, tea, sugar, sisal, maize, cotton, tobacco, and
rubber. The results obtained have already been discussed. In all
these trials the conversion of vegetabie and animal wastes into
humus has been followed by a definite improvement in the health
of the crops and of the live stock. My personal experience in India
has been repeated all over the world. At the same time a number
of interesting problems have been unearthed. One example will
suffice. In Rhodesia humus protects the maize crop from the
attacks of the witchweed (Striga lutea), Is this infestation a conse-
quence of malnutrition? Is immunity conferred by the establish-
ment of the mycorrhizal association? Answers to these questions
would advance our knowledge and would suggest a number of
fascinating problems for investigation. i

THE MYCORRHIZAL ASSOCIATION AND DISEASE

Why is humus such an important factor in the health ofthe crop?
The mycorrhizal association provides the clue. The steps by which”
this conclusion was reached in the case of tea have already been
stated (p. 56).

This association is not confined to one particular forest crop. It
occurs in most if not all our cultivated plants. ‘During 1938
Dr. Rayner and Dr. Levisohn examined and reported on a large
number of my samples—rubber, coffee, cacao, leguminous shade
trees, green-manure crops, coco-nuts, tung, cardamons, vine,
banana, cotton, sugar-cane, hops, strawberries, bulbs, grasses and
clovers and so forth. In all of these the mycorrhizal ‘association
occurs. It is probably universal. We appear to be dealing with a
very remarkable example of symbiosis in which certain soil fungi
directly connect the humus in the soil with the roots of the crop.

[PAG 194]
RETREAT OF CROP AND ANIMAL BEFORE THE PARASITE 167

This fungous tissue may contain as much as 10 per cent. of nitrogen
in the form of protein, which is digested in the active roots and
probably carried by the transpiration current to the seat of carbon
assimilation in the green leaves. Its effective presence in the roots
of the-plant is associated with health; its absence is associated
with diminished resistance to disease. Clearly the first step. in
investigating any plant disease in the future will be to see that the
soil is fertile and that this fungous association is in full working
order. If it is as important as is now suggested, there will be a
marked improvement in the behaviour of the host once the
fertility of the soil is restored. If it has no significance, a fertile
soil will make no differeice.

I have just obtained confirmatory results which prove how
important humus is in helping a mycorrhiza-former—the apple
—to throw off disease. In 1935 I began the restoration, by means
of humus, of my own garden, the soil of which was completely
worn-out when I acquired it in the summer of 1934. The apple
trees were literally smothered with American blight, green-fly, and
fruit-destroying caterpillars like the codlin moth. The quality of
the fruit was poor. Nothing was done to control-these pests beyond
the gradual building up of the humus content of the soil. In three
years the parasites disappeared; the trees were transformed; the
foliage and the new wood now leave nothing to be desired; the
quality of the fruit is first class. These trees will now be used for
infection experiments in order to ascertain whether the: fertility
of the soil has been completely.restored or not. The reactior. of
the trees to the various pests of the apple will answer this question.
No soil analysis can tell me as much as the trees will.

The meaning of all this is clear. Nature has provided a marvel-
lous piece of machinery for conferring discase-resistance on the
crop. This machinery is only active in soil rich in humus; it is
inactive or absent in infertile land and in similar soils manured
with chemicals. The fuel needed to keep this machinery in motion
is a regular supply of freshly prepared humus, properly made.
Fertile soils then yield crops resistant to disease. Worn-out soils,

~ even when stimulated with chemical manures, result in produce
which needs the assistance of insecticides and fungicides to yield
a crop at all. These in broad outline are the facts.

[PAG 195]
168 HEALTH; INDISPOSTTION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

The complete scientific explanation of the working of this
remarkable example of symbiosis remains to be provided. It
would appear that in the mycorrhizal association Nature has
given us a mechanism far more important and far more universal
than the nodules on the roots of the clover family. It reconciles
at one bound science and the age-long experience of the tillers of
the soil as to the supreme importance of humus. There has always
been a mental reservation on the part of the best farmers as to the
value of artificial manures compared with good old-fashioned
muck. The effect of the two on the soil and on the crop is never
quite the same. Further, there is a growing conviction that the ~

- increase in plant and animal diseases is somehow. connected with -

the use of artificials. In the old days of mixed farming the spraying -*

machine was unknown, the toll taken by troubles like foot-and-
mouth disease was insignificant compared with what it is now.
The clue to all these differences—the mycorrhizal association—
has been there all the time. It was not realized because the
experiment stations have blindly followed the fashion set by Liebig
and Rothamsted in thinking only of soil nutrients and have for-
gotten to look at the way the plant and the soil come into gear. An
attempt has been made to apply science to a biological problem by
means of one fragment of knowledge only.

THE INVESTIGATIONS OF TO-MORROW

The next step in this investigation is to test the soundness of.
the views put forward. This has been started by composting
diseased material and then using the humus to grow another crop
on the same land. Diseased tomatoes have been converted into
humus by one of the large growers in the south of England and
the compost has been used to grow a second crop in the same ©
greenhouses. No infection occurred.

The final proof that insects, fungi, viruses and so forth are re not the
cause of disease will be provided when the infection experiments of
to-morrow are undertaken. Instead of conducting these trials on
plants and animals grown anyhow, the experimental material
will be plants and animals, properly sclected, efficiently managed,
and nourished by or on the produce of a fertile soil. Such plants
can be sprayed with active fungous and insect material without

[PAG 196]
RETREAT OF CROP AND ANIMAL BEFORE THE PARASITE 169

“harm. Among such herds of cattle cases of foot-and-mouth
disease can be introduced without any danger of serious infection.

The afflicted animals themselves will recover. When some .

audacious innovator of the Hosier type, who has no interest in the
maintenance of the existing research structure, conducts such
experiments, the vast fabric of disease-control which has been
erected in countries like Great Britain will finally collapse.
Farmers will emancipate themselves from the thraldom created
by the fear of the parasite. Another step forward will be taken
which will not stop at farming.

My self-imposed task is approaching completion. I have « ex
amined in great detail for forty years the principles underlying
the treatment of plant and animal diseases, as well as the practice
based on these principles. It now remains to sum up this experi-

_ ence and to offer suggestions for the future.

There can be no doubt that the work in progress on disease at
the Experiment Stations is a gigantic and expensive failure, that
its continuance on present lines can lead us nowhere and ‘that
steps tnust be taken without delay to place it on sounder lines.

The cause of this failure is not far to seek. The investigations:

have been undertaken by specialists. The problems of disease
‘have not been studied as a whole, but have been divorced from
practice, split up, departmentalized and confined to the experts
most conversant with the particular fragment of science which
deals with some organism associated with the disease.

This specialist approach is bound to fail. This is obvious when
we consider: (1) the real problem—how to grow healthy crops
and how to raise healthy animals, and (2) the nature of disease—

the breakdown of a complex biological system, which includes the -

soil in its relation to the plant and the animal. The problem
must include agriculture as an art. The investigator must there-
fore be a farmer as well as a scientist, and must keep simultaneously
in mind all the factors involved. Above all he must be on his
guard to avoid wasting his life in the study of a mare’s nest: in
dealing with a subject which’ owes its existence to bad farming
which will disappear the moment sound methods of husbandry
are employed.

The problems presented by the retreat of the crop and of the

è

[PAG 197]
170 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE
animal before the parasite and the conventional methods of
investigation of these questions are clearly out of relation. It -
follows therefore that a-research organization which has lost.