=== An Agricultural Testament - Albert Howard.pdf — CHUNK 7/14 ===
Chars: 44,972 | Offset: 267,404



A detailed examination of the gases ‘produced i in the tips showed
_that in addition to nitrogen, carbon dioxide, ‘and oxygen, a con-
siderable quantity of methane (16 per cent.) and smaller propor-

[PAG 130]
.DEVELOPMENTS OF THE INDORE PROCESS LIT
tions of carbon monoxide (2-8 per cent.) and hydrogen (2°5 per
cent.) occurred. Traces only of sulphuretted hydrogen were de-
tected. The presence of carbon monoxide, methane, and hydrogen
would naturally result from the anaerobic fermentation which
establishes itself in the second stage of the production of humus
after the free oxygen in the tip becomes exhausted. These gases
are similar to those produced by the decay of organic matter in
swamp rice cultivation in India, where. the supply of oxygen is
almost always in defect. The absence of anything beyond a trace
of sulphuretted hydrogen is reassuring, as this proves that the
intense reduction which precedes the formation of the salts of
alkali soils does not occur in a controlled tip.

The manurial value of the humus in the tips was determined by
analysis and valuation. The average content of nitrogen was 0:8
per cent., of phosphoric acid o-5 per cent., of potash o-g per cent.
The estimated value of the’ dry material per ton was 10s. This
value, however, will have to be multiplied by a factor ranging
from 2 to 2-5, because experience has shown that the market price
of organic manures, based on supply and demand, is anything
from two to two and a half times greater than that calculated from
the chemical analysis. The unit system of valuation applies only to
artificial manures like sulphate of ammonia made in factories; it
does not hold in the case of natural manures like humus.

One of the last sections of the Report relates to the danger of
‘ infectious diseases as a possible consequence of controlled tipping.

The authors conclude that ‘danger arising from possible presence

of pathogenic germs in a controlled tip may be dismissed as non-

existent’.

One of the plots, No. 1, not only developed a high temperature
but showed a much more gradual fall than the other plots. This
was apparently due to the higher content of organic matter com-
bined with better acration. The results of this plot suggest that
more and better humus might be obtained in a controlled tip if
the object of tipping were, as it should be, to secure the largest
amount of humus of the best possible quality. It would not be
a difficult matter to increase the oxygen intake at the beginning by
allowing more and more air to diffuse in from the’ atmosphere.
This could perhaps be done most easily and cheaply by reducing

[PAG 131]
ether or not jt Ways be neces TY-to erect Permanent
installations for converti 8 hight soil and town refise into humys
Xperience only can de de. Ina numb Cases it may be easier
to do the co Posting daily in Suitable pits oF trenches on the lines
described On p, 240, this Way the pits or trenches themselves
become temporary composting chambers, no turning is required;

the line of Pits or trenches.can Soon be used for agricultural pur-
Poses—for gfowing all kinds of fodder, Cereal, an Vegetable crops,
At the Same time the land is leg ina high state Of fertility,

[PAG 132]
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE INDORE PROCESS .113

A number of medical officers all over the world are trying out
the composting of night soil on the lines suggested. In a few years
a great deal of experience will be available, on which the projects
_ of the future can be based.

As far as countries like Great Britain are concerned, the only
openings for the composting of night soil occur in the country-
side and in the outer urban zones where the houses are provided
with kitchen gardens. In such areas the vast quantities of humus
in the controlled tips.can be used in earth-closets and the mixed:
night soil and humus can be lightly buried in the gardens on the
lines so successfully carried out by the late Dr. Poore and described
in his Rural Hygiene, the second edition of which was published i in
1894.

Since Dr. Poore’s work appeared a new development i in housing
has taken place in the garden cities and in colonies like those
started by the Land Settlement Association. Here, although
there is ample land for converting every possible waste into humus,
the water-borne method of sewage disposal and the duist-carts of
the crowded town have been slavishly copied. In an interesting
paper published in the British Medical Journal of February gth,
1924, Dr. L. J. Picton, then Medical Officer of Health of the
Winsford Urban District, Cheshire, pointed out how easy it would
be to apply Dr. Poore’s principles to a garden city.

‘A plot of 4 acres should be taken on the outskirts of a town and
twenty ‘houses built upon it. Suppose the plot roughly square, and the
road to skirt one corner of it. Then this corner alone will possess that
valuable quality “frontage”. Sacrifice this scrap of frontage by making
a short gravelled drive through it, to end blindly in a “‘turn-round” in
the middle of the plot. The houses should all face south—that is to
say, all their living rooms should face south. They must therefore be

oblong, with their long axes cast and west (Fig. 1). The larder, the
lobby, lavatory, staircase and landing will occupy the north side of
each house.’ The earth closet is best detached but approached under
cover—a cross-ventilated: passage or short veranda, or, if upstairs, a
covered bridge giving access to it. . The houses should be set upon the
plot in a diamond-shaped pattern, or in other words, a square with its
corners to north, south, cast and west. Thus one house will occupy
the northernmost point of the plot, and from it, to the south-cast and
south-west, will run a row of some five or six houses a side, arranged in
echelon, Just as platoons in echelon do not block cach other’s line of
1 .

[PAG 133]
m4. . THE INDORE PROCESS

fire so houses thus arranged will not block each other’s sunlight. A
dozen more houses echeloned in a V with its apex to the south will
complete the diamond-shaped lay-out. The whole plot would be
treated as one garden, and one whole-time head gardener, with the

Fia. 1. A model layout for 20 cottages.

help he needed, would be responsible for its cultivation. The daily
removal of the closet earth and its use as manure—its immediate
committal to the surface soil and its light covering therewith—would
naturally be amongst his duties. A gardener using manure of great
value, not a scavenger removing refuse; a “garden rate” paid by each
houscholder, an investment productive of fresh vegetables to be had at
his door, and in one way or another repaying him his outlay, not to
speak of the amenity added to his surroundings, instead of a “sanitary
rate” paid to be rid of rubbish—such ‘are the bases of this scheme.’

What is needed are a few working examples of such a housing
scheme and a published account of the results. These, if successful,

[PAG 134]
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE INDORE PROCESS 115

would at once influence all future building schemes in country
districts and would point the way to a considerable reduction in
rents and rates. The garden-city and water-borne sewage are a
contradiction in terms. Water-borne sewage has developed be-'
cause of overcrowding and the absence of cultivated land. Remove
overcrowding and the case for this wasteful system disappears.
In the garden city there is no need to get rid of wastes by the
expensive methods of the town. The soil will do it far more
efficiently and at far less cost. At the same time the fertility of the
garden city areas will be raised and large crops of fresh vegetables
and fruit—one of the factors underlying health—will be auto-
matically provided. |

Such a reform in housing schemes will not stop at the outer
fringes of our towns and cities. It will be certain to spread to the
villages and to the country-side, where a few examples of cottage
gardens, rendered fertile by the wastes of the inhabitants, are still
to be found here and there. More are needed. More will arise the
moment it is realized that the proper utilization of the wastes of
the population depends on composting processes and the correct
use of humus. All the trouble, all the expense, and all the diffi-
culties in dealing with human wastes arise from following the
wrong principle—water—and setting in motion a vast train of
putrefactive processes. The principle that must be followed is
abundant acration at the beginning: the conversion of wastes into
humus by the processes Nature employs in every wood and every
forest.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

GreENWELL, Str BERNARD. ‘Soil Fertility: the Farm's Capital’, Journal of the Farmers’
Club, 1939, p. 1.

Howarp, Sir Aubert. ‘Preservation of Domestic Wastes for Use on the Land’,
Journal of the Institution of Sanitary Engineers, xliii, 1939, p. 173.

—— ‘Experiments with Pulverized Refuse as a Humus-Forming Agent’, Journal of
the Institute of Public Cleansing, xxix, 1939, p. 504.

Jones, B. B., and Owen, F. Some Notes on the Scientific Aspects of Controlled Tipping, City
of Manchester, 1934.

Picton, L. J.. ‘The Economic Disposal of Excreta: Garden Sanitation’, British
Medical Fournal, February gth, 1924.

Poors, G. V, Essays on Rural Hygime, London, 1894.

Public Cleansing Costing Returns for the year ended March 31st, 1938, H. M. Stationery
Office, 1939.

[PAG 135]
PART III
HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN
AGRICULTURE -

CHAPTER IX
SOIL AERATION

TE transformation of soil fertility into a crop is only possible
by means of oxidation processes. The various soil organisms—
bacteria and fungi in particular—as well as the active roots need
a constant supply of oxygen. As soon as this was recognized, aera-
tion became an important factor in the study.of the soil. In this
matter, however, practice has long preceded theory: many devices
such as sub-soil drainage, sub-soiling, as well as mixed cropping—
all of which assist the ventilation of the soil—have been in use for
a long time.

The full significance of soil aeration in agriculture has only been
recognized by investigators during the last quarter of a century.
The reason is interesting. Till recent years most of the agricultural
experiment stations were situated in humid regions where the -
rainfall is well distributed. Rain is a saturated solution of oxygen
and is very effective in supplying this gas to the soil whenever
percolation is possible. Hence in such regions crops are not likely
to suffer from poor aeration to anything like the same extent as
those grown in the arid regions of North-West India where the
soils are silt-like and most of the moisture has to be supplied by
irrigation water low in dissolved oxygen. Such soils lose their
porosity with the greatest ease when flooded; the minute particles
run together’ and form an impermeable surface crust. Only when
the humus content is kept high can adequate permeability be
maintained. Long before the advent of the modern canal, the
cultivators of India had acted on this principle. The organic
matter content of the areas commanded by wells has always been
maintained at a high level. Irrigation engineers and Agricultural
Departments have been slow to utilize this experience. Canal
water has been provided, but no steps have been taken simul-
taneously to increase the humus content of the soil.

[PAG 136]
PLATE III

Rainfall in inches (weekly totals)
Ground-water leveltinfeet above mean Sea level
E

vant o
1% |
Feb. 1 / I : |
\ < Ì
i N
farch, Lo *
March! E | & \
r. ia N. È \,
en & \e 4
VE

May I

"I = oe È; ;

July 4 :
NÉ \ i alls
Aug, i NS H all le
: ale

Sen, { i YJ ty
i \ i Hl ts
Oct. 1 h SII &
i ait

YA is

—,
TN
~

mer
=:
"ii

DI
LT.

“Humidity Cfortni ghtiy*means)

N

, FEE E E Rd È
Soil and ait temperature(fort nightly ricans)
RAINFALL, TEMPERATURE, HUMIDITY, AND DRAINAGE,

» 1922

[PAG 138]
SOIL AERATION . 117
It follows from the constant demands of the soil for fresh air.

that any agency which interferes, even partially or temporarily,
with aeration must be of supreme importance in agriculture. A
number of factors occur which bring about every gradation
between a restricted oxygen supply and complete asphyxiation.
The former result in infertility, the latter in the death of the soil.
How does the plant respond to soil conditions in which oxygen
becomes the limiting factor? Generally speaking there is an imme-
diate reaction on the part of the root system. This is well seen in
forest trees and in the undergrowth met with in woodlands. The
‘ roots adjust themselves to the new conditions; the trees establish
themselves and at the same time improve the aeration and also
add to the fertility of the soil; incidentally all other competitors
‘are vanquished. Soil aeration cannot therefore be studied as if it
were an isolated factor in soil science. It must be considered along
with (1) the responses of the root system to deficient air, (2) the
relation between root activity and soil conditions throughout the
year, and (3) the competition between the roots of various species.
In this way the full significance of this factor in agriculture and in
the maintenance of soil fertility becomes apparent. This is the
theme of the present chapter. An attempt will be made to explain
soil aeration as it affects the plant in relation to the environment
and to show how the plant itself can be used as a research agent.

. THE SOIL AERATION FACTOR IN RELATION TO
GRASS AND TREES

Between the years 1914 and 1924 the factors involved in the com-
petition between grass and trees were investigated by me at Pusa.
Three main problems were kept in view, namely, (1) why grass
can be so injurious to fruit trees, (2) the nature of the weapons by
which forest trees vanquish grass, and (3) the reaction of the root
system of trees to the aeration of the soil. An account of this study
was published in the Proceedings of the Royal Society of London in
1925 (B, vol. xcvii, pp. 284-321). As the results support the view
that in the investigation of the soil aeration factor the plant can
always make an important contribution, a summary of the main
results and a number of the original illustrations have been in-
cluded in this chapter.

[PAG 139]
118 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE _

. The climatic factors at Pusa are summed up in Plate III. It_
will be seen that after the break of the south-west monsoon in’
June, the humidity rises followed by a steady upward movement:
in the ground water-level till October when it falls again. In 1922
the total rise of the sub-soil water-level was 16-5 feet, a factor
which is bound to interfere with the oxygen supply, as the soil air
which is rich in carbon dioxide is slowly forced i into the atmosphere
by the ascending water-table.

The soil is 4 highly calcareous silt-like loam containing about
75 per cent. of firie sand and about 2 per cent. of clay. About 98
per cent. will pass through a sieve of 80 meshes to the linear inch.
There is no line of demarcation between soil and sub-soil: the sub-
soil resembles the soil and consists of alternating layers of loam,
clay, and fine sand down to the sub-soil water, which normally
occurs about 20 feet from the surface. The percentage of calcium
carbonate is often over 30, while the available phosphate is in the
neighbourhood of o-oo1 per cent. In spite of this low content of
phosphate, the tract in which Pusa is situated is highly fertile,
Maintaining a population of over 1,200 to the square mile and
exporting large quantities of seeds, tobacco, cattle, and surplus
labour without the aid of any phosphatic manures. The facts
relating to agricultural production in this tract flatly. contradict
one of the theories of agricultural science, namely, ‘the need for ©
phosphatic fertilizers in areas where soil analysis shows a marked.
deficiency in this element. Two other factors, however, limit crop
production—shortage of humus and loss of permeability during
the late rains due to a colloidal condition of the soil; the pore
spaces near the surface become water-logged; percolation stops
and the soil is almost asphyxiated, a condition which is first indi-
cated by the behaviour of the root system and then by restricted
growth. :

For the investigation of the soil aeration factor in relation to
grass and trees at Pusa, eight species of fruit trees—three deciduous
and five evergreen—were planted out in three acres of uniform
land, each species being raised from a single parent. The plan
(Fig. 2) gives further details and makes the arrangement clear.
Two years after planting, when the trees were fully established
and remarkably even, a strip including nine trees of each of the

[PAG 140]
SOIL AERATION | 119

eight rows was laid down to grass. The two end plots, which were
clean cultivated, served as controls. When the grass was well
‘ established and its injurious effect on the young trees was clearly
marked, the three southern trees of the grass plot were provided
with aeration trenches, 18 inches wide and 24 inches deep filled
with broken bricks, these trenclies being made midway between
- the lines of trees. To ascertain the effect of grass on established

sli slo

n i sn fo a n
Peach x | ala
Guava x I
Utcht x |
Mango x I
Loquat x
Lime Li
Custard
apple *
Plum x
Cultivated si Gross 1921 Gross 1916 | Gross ond $ Cultivated
(14) (7-9) (10-15) aeration (19-24) souni
NORTH ‘isa

Fic. 2. , Plan of Experimental Fruit Area, Pusa.

trees in full bearing, the southern strip of the northern control plot
was grassed over in 1921. ‘The general results of the experiment,
as seen in 1923, are shown in Plate IV. The harmful effect of
grass on fruit trees at Pusa is even more intense than on clay soils
like those of Woburn in Great Britain. Several species were de-
stroyed altogether within a few years.

As great differences in root development were observed between
the trees under grass, under grass with aeration trenchcs, and
under clean cultivation, the first step in investigating the cause of
the harmful effect of grass appeared to be a systematic exploration
of the root system under clean cultivation s0'as to establish the
general facts of distribution, to ascertain the regions of root activity
during the year and to correlate this information with the growth
of the above ground portion of the trees. This was carricd out in
1921 and the work was repeated in 1922 and again in 1923. The
method adopted was direct: to expose the root system quickly and
to use a fine water-jet for freeing the active roots from the soil
particles. By using a fresh tree for each examination and by
employing relays of labourers, it was possible to expose any desired

[PAG 141]
120 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE .

portion of the root system down to 20 feet in a few hours and to
make the observations before the roots could react to the new
conditions. -

THE ROOT SYSTEM OF DECIDUOUS TREES

The root systems of three deciduous trees—the plum, the peach,
and the custard apple—were first studied. The results obtained
in the three species were very similar, so it is only necessary to
describe in detail one of them—the plum.

The local variety of plum sheds its leaves in November and
flowers profusely in February and March. The fruit ripens in
early May, the hottest period of the year. The new shoots ar
produced during the hot weather and early rains. °

The root system is extensive and appears at first to be entirely
superficial and to consist of many large freely branching roots
running more or less parallel to the surface in the upper 18 inches
of soil. Further exploration disclosed a second root system. From
the under side of the large surface roots, smaller members are
given off which grow vertically downwards to about 16 feet from
the surface. These break up into many branches in the deep layers
of moist fine sand, just above the water-table. The Indian variety
of plum therefore has two root systems (Plate V, Fig. 1). The deep
root system begins to develop soon after the young trees are
planted out.! .

During the resting period (December to January) occasional
absorbing roots are formed in the superficial system. When
flowering begins, the formation of new-rcotlets spreads from the
surface to the deep soil layers. As the surface soil dries in March,
the active roots on the superficial system turn brown and die and
this portion passes into a dormant condition. From the middle of
March to the break of the rains in June, root absorption is con-
fined entirely to the deeper layers of soil. Thus on April 14th,
1921, when the trees were ripening their fruit and making new
growth during a period of intense heat and dryness, most of the

1 In August 1923 the root systems cf young custard apples, mangoes, guavas, limes,
and loquats, planted in March 1922 were examined. The young vertical roots varied
in length from ro inches in the custard’apple and lime to 1 foot in the mango, 1 foot
2:5 inches in the guava and 1 foot 8 inches in the loguat. Newly planted trees form
the superficial system first of all, followed rapidly by the deep system.

[PAG 142]
PLATE I\

wimg

Bury i

ph

pryjeng

£361 ‘vsnd

‘SHTML LINUI NO SSVUO JO SLOTIIT TNINUVH FHL

1361 9/61 enyouay
prewt, uonyown 7 veoh,

[PAG 144]
SOIL AERATION . 121

water, nitrogen, and minerals necessary for growth were absorbed
from a layer of moist fine sand between 10 feet 6 inches and 15 feet
below the surface. This state of affairs continues till the break of
the rains in June when a sudden change takes place. The moisten-
ing of the surface soil rapidly brings the superficial root system
into intense activity. These. hitherto dormant roots literally break
into new active rootlets in all directions, the process beginning
about thirty hours after the first fall of rain. In the early monsoon
therefore the trees use the whole of the root system, both superficial
and deep. A change takes place during late July as the level of the
ground water rises. In early August active roots are practically
confined to the upper 2 feet of soil. Absorption is now restricted
+ to the surface system. At this period the active roots react to the
poor soil aeration due to the rise in the ground water-level by
growing towards the atmosphere and even out of the soil into the
air, particularly under the shade of the trees and where the soil is
covered by a layer of dead leaves (Plate V, Fig. 3). This aero- .
tropism continues till early October, when the growth above
ground stops and the trees ripen their wood preparatory to leaf
fall and the cold weather rest. During October, as the level of
the ground water falls and air is drawn into the soil, there is some
renewal of root activity near the surface and down to 3 feet.

One interesting exception to this periodicity in the root activity
of the plum occurs. Falls of rain, nearly an inch in amount, some-
times occur during the hot season. ‘The effect on the superficial
root system of the plum of three of these storms was investigated.
When the rainfall: was 0:75 of an inch or more, the surface roots
at once responded and produced a multitude of new absorbing
roots. As the soil dried these ceased to function and died. In one
case, where the rainfall was only 0-23 inches, no effect was pro-
duced. Irrigation during the hot weather acts in a similar manner
to these sudden falls of rain. It maintains the surface root system
in action during this period and explains why irrigation during
the hot months is necessary on the alluvium if really good quality
fruit is to be obtained. It is true that without artificial watering
the trees ripen a crop at Pusa, but in size and quality the crop is
greatly inferior to that obtained with the help of irrigation. Either
root system will produce a plum. High quality is obtained only

[PAG 145]
122 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

when the surface system functions; poor quality always results
when the deep system only is in action.

In the detailed examination of the active surface roots of the
plum and of the seven other, species in this experiment, fresh
fungous mycelium was often observed running from ‘the soil
towards the growing roots. In the deeper soil layers this was never
observed. In all probability this mycelium is connected with the
mycorrhizal association so common in fruit trees. This matter was
not carried further at the time.- It is, however, more than probable
that all the eight species of fruit trees in the Pusa Experiment are
mycorrhiza-formers and that the fungus observed round the active
roots was concerned with this association. The mycorrhizal rela-
tionship in the surface roots is probably involved in the production
of high quality fruit. Plants with two root systems such as these
are therefore admirably adapted for the future study of the relation
between humus in the soil, the mycorrhizal association, and the
development of quality. It would not be. difficult to compare
plants grown side by side on the sub-soil (to remove the humus
occurring in the surface soil), the one manured with complete
artificials, the other with freshly prepared humus. In the former
there would be little or no mycorrhizal invasion; in the latter it
would probably be considerable. If, as is most likely, the mycor-
rhizal association enables the tree to absorb nutrients in the organic
form by the digestion ‘of fungous mycelium, this would -explain
why quality only results when the surface roots are in action. -, -

Support for the view of plant nutrition suggested. in the pre-
ceding paragraph was supplied by the custard apple, the root
development of which is similar to-that of the plum and peach.
In the custard apple new shoots are formed in the hot weather
when the water, nitrogen, and nutrients are obtained from the
deep soil layers only. After the break in the rains and the resump-
tion of root activity on the surface, the leaves increase in size (from
5:8x2:6 cm. to 10-5X4:5 cm.), develop a deeper and healthier
green, while the internodes lengthen (Fig. 3). The custard apple
records the results of these various factors in the size and colour of
its leaves and in this way acts as its-own soil Analyst.

While this book was being printed specimens of the | young
active roots of the custard apple, mango, and lime were collected

[PAG 146]
a SOIL AERATION. - 7 183
in Mr. Hiralal’s orchard, Tukoganj, Indore, Central India, on
November 11th, 1939, by Mr. Y.D. Wad. They were examined by:

Dr. Ida Levisohn on December. rgth, 1939, who reported that all

- Fic. 3. Hot weather (below aa) and monsoon foliage (above aa) of the
custard apple,

three species showed typical endotrophic mycorrhizal infection
indicated macroscopically by the absence of root hairs, or great
reduction in their number, and, in ‘the mango particularly, by
beading. The active hyphae in all three cases were of large dia-
meter, with thin walls and granular contents, the digestion stages
occurring in the inner cortex with clumping of mycelium, remains
of hyphae and homogencous granular masses. Absorption of the
fungus appeared to be taking place with great rapidity. In the
custard apple the same kind of mycelium was found outside
the roots and connected with them.

[PAG 147]
4

124 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE +

THE ROOT SYSTEM OF EVERGREENS .

The most interesting root system of the five evergreens stidied —
mango, guava, litchi, sour lime, and loquat—was the guava.
| The guava drops its foliage in early March, simultaneously
producing new leaves. It proved an excellent plant for the study
of the root system, as the reddish roots are strongly developed and
easy to follow in a grey alluvial soil like that of Pusa. There is an _
abundant superficial system giving off numerous branches which
grow downwards to the level of permanent water (Plate VI, Fig. 1).
The whole of the root system, superficial and deep, was found to
be active at the beginning of the hot weather (March 21st, 1921),
the chief zone of activity occurring in 4 moist layer of fine sand
10 feet.4 inches to 14 feet 7 inches from the surface. As the hot
«weather became established, the absorbing roots of the guava
near the surface dried up and root activity. was confined to the
deeper layers of soil. In 1922 the monsoon started on June 3rd. .
‘An exposure of the surface roots was made on June sth, forty-eight
hours after the rains started. From’: foot 5 inches to 12 feet new
roots were found in large numbers, the longest measuring I cm.
‘As the soil became moistened by the early rains, the dormant zone
produced new roots from above downwards till the whole root
system became active. After July a change takes place as the
ground water rises, the deep roots becoming dormant as immersion *
proceeds. On August 25th, 1922, root activity was’ mainly con-
fined to the surface system in the upper 29 inches of soil, the last
active root occurring at 40 inches. In the late rains the active
roots escape asphyxiation by becoming strongly aerotropic (Plate
VI, Fig. 4). An interesting change takes place after the level of the
sub-soil water falls in October and the aeration of the lower soil
layers is renewed. The deep root system again becofhes active in
November, the degree of activity depending on the monsoon rain-
fall (Plate VI, Fig. 5). In 1921, a year of short rainfall when the
rise of the ground water was-very small, the deep roots came into
activity in November down to 15 feet 3 inches. The next year—
November 1922—when the monsoon and the rise of the ground
water were both normal, root activity did not extend below 5 feet
7 inches.

[PAG 148]
“SOIL AERATION ‘125

Although the guava is able to make new growth during the hot
season by means of its deep root system it is a decided advantage
if the surface roots are maintained in action by means of irrigation.

Surface watering in the hot weather of 1921 increased the size of

the leaves from g-1 X 4:0 cm. to 11-6 X 5-0 cm. and greatly im-
proved their colour. .

‘The root system and the development of active roots in the
mango, litchi, lime, and loquat follow generally what has been
described in the guava. All these species give off vertical roots

from the surface system, butin the case of the litchi and the lime ©

these did not penetrate to the deeper layers. The roots of all four
species exhibit marked aerotropism in the late rains. The vertical
roots of the lime were always unable to penetrate the deeper
layers of clay.

THE HARMFUL EFFECT OF GRASS
- The harmful effect of grass on fruit trees varies with the species
and with the period in the life of the tree when the grass is planted.
Young trees are more adversely affected than fully developed
individuals, which contain large quantities of reserves in the wood.
Deciduous species suffer more than evergreens. These facts suggest
that the harmful effect of grass is a consequence of starvation.

The effect of grass on young trees was first studied. The custard
apple was the most sensitive. The trees were killed in 1916 within
the first two years after the grass was planted. Next in order of
susceptibility were the loquat (all died before the end of 1919),
the plum, the lime, and the peach. The litchi and the mango just
managed to maintain themselves. The guava was by far the least
affected, the trees under grass being almost half the height of those
under clean cultivation.

Grass not only reduces the amount of new growth but affects
the leaves, branches, old wood, and fruit as well as the root system.
The results relating to the above ground portion of the trees closely
follow those described by the Woburn investigators. Compared
with the foliage produced under clean cultivation, the leaves from
the trees -under grass appear later, are smaller and yellower and
fall prematurely. The internodes are short. The bark of the twigs
is light coloured, dull, and unhealthy and quite different from that

[PAG 149]
126 . HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE:

of healthy trees. The bark of the old wood has a similar appear-
ance and attracts lichens and algae to a much greater extent than
that of the cultivated trees. The trees under grass flower late and
sparingly. The fruit is small, tough, very highly coloured, and
ripens earlier than the normal.

The effect of grass on the root system is s equally striking. Except
in the guava, the effect of grass on the superficial system is to
restrict the amount of root development, to force the roots below
the grass, and to reduce the number of active roots during the
© monsoon. The guava is an exception. The surface system is well
developed, the roots are not driven downwards by the grass while
active rootlets are readily formed in the upper 4 inches of soil
soon after the rains begin, very much as in the cultivated trees,
In August 1922, when the ground water had risen to its highest
point, the absorbing roots of the guava were found in the surface
film of soil, and also above the surface among the stems of the
grass. The grass carpet therefore acts as an asphyxiating agency
in all these species, the guava excepted.

- The grass covering has no appreciable effect cither on “the
development or on the activity of the deep roots. This portion
of the root system was explored during the hot weather of 1921
in the case of the guava (Plate VI, Fig. 3), mango, and litchi and
‘results were obtained very similar to those in the corresponding
cultivated trees.

* Grass not only affects the roots underneath but also the develop-
ment of those of the neighbouring trees under cultivation. Such
roots either turn away from the grass, as in the custard apple, or
else turn sharply downwards before they reach it.

A number of conclusions can be drawn froin these root exposures.
The custard apple, loquat, peach, and lime are unable to maintain
their surface root systems under grass, but behave normally 25°.
regards the deep root system. Only the guava is able to get its
roots above those of the grass during the rains. _

The study of the harmful effect of grass on established trees also
yielded interesting results. In this case the trees carried ample
reserves in the wood and, as might be expected, the damage was
less spectacular than in the case of young trees ‘with little or no
reserves.. The order of susceptibility to grass, however, was very

[PAG 150]
È SOIL AERATION - 127

much the same in the two cases. When the fully-grown trees were
first put under grass in August 1921, the grass at first grew poorly
in tufts with bare ground between. Even this imperfect covering
soon affected the custard apples, loquats, peaches, and litchis. By
the rains of 1922 the grass became continuous; the effect on the
trees was then much more marked. .

In the plum interesting changes occurred. In July 1922, less
than a year after planting the grass, the new shoots showed arrested
growth and the foliage was attacked by leaf-destroying insects,
which, however, ignored the leaves of the neighbouring cultivated
plot. If the insects were the real cause of the trouble, it is difficult
to see why the infection did not spread beyond the trees under
grass. In January 1923 the average length. of the new wood in
these trees was 1 foot 5 inches compared with 3 feet 7 inches in
the controls. The twigs were dull and purplish, the internodes
were short (Plate V, Fig. 5). In February 1923 flowering was
‘ restricted and in April only tufts of leaves were formed at the ends
of the branches instead of new shoots (Plate V, Fig. 8). Early in
.1924, when I left Pusa and had to discontinue the work, a great
deal of die-back was taking place.

Very similar results were obtained in all the species except the
mango, which resisted grass better than any of the others. No
definite effect was observed in this species till June 1923, when the

_ foliage became distinctly lighter than that of the cultivated trees.
The general results brought about by grass in all these cases
suggested that the trees were slowly dying from starvation.

A year after the grass was planted and the grass effect was
becoming marked, the root system of these established trees was
examined. In August 1922 the plums, peaches, custard apples,
mangoes, litchis, and loquats under grass were found to have
produced very few active rootlets in the upper foot of soil com-
pared with the controls. In the case of the custard apples and the
loquats, which suffered most from grass, there was a marked
tendency for the new roots to grow downwards and away from
the grass. No differences were observed in the dormancy or
activity of the deep root system as compared with the controls.
The deep roots behaved exactly like those under clean cultivation.

During these examinations two instances of the striking effect

[PAG 151]
128 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE _

of increased aeration on root development were observed. In
July 1923 burrowing rats took up their quarters under one of the
limes and one of the loquats, in each case on the southern side.
Shortly afterwards the leaves just above the rat holes became very

much: darker in colour than the rest. Examination of the soil

Ater

ITA dry
Mr
il

He, a

Fic. 4. The effect of burrowing rats on the growth of the plum under grass (June
2Ist, 1923). °

immediately round the burrows showed a copious development
of new active rootlets, far greater even than in the surface soil of
the cultivated plot. The extra aeration had a wonderfully stimu-
| .Jating effect on the development of active roots, even under grass.
The appearance of the leaves suggested an application of nitro-
genous manure. Similar observations were made in the case of
the plum (Fig. 4). Here the burrows caused a dying tree to produce
new growth. °

THE EFFECT OF AERATION TRENCHES ON YOUNG TREES
UNDER GRASS fo
The effect of aeration trenches in modifying the influerice of
grass suggests-that one of the factors at work is soil asphyxiation. -
In the case of the custard apple and the lime the aeration trenches
had no effect; all the trees died. The death of the plums was
delayed by the aeration trenches. The loquats, litchis, and man- -

[PAG 152]
PLATE V

- d “n = ‘. ” 2 È 2 bi

PLUM (Primus communis, Huds.).

Fic. 1. Superficial and decp roots (April 25, 1921).

Fic. 2. The repair of the deep root-svstem (August 6. 1023).
Fic. 3. Superficial rootlets growing towards the surface (Aucust 12, 1922).
Fics. 4 and 5. New wood under cultivation and crass (January 25, 1
Fics. 6 and 7. New shoots and leaves under clean cultivation (Apri 5
Fics. 8 and o. The corresponding growth under grass (April 5, 10231.

Br
1023).

[PAG 154]
SOIL AERATION 129

goes benefited considerably. In the guavas the trees provided
with aeration trenches were indistinguishable from those under
grass. The general results are shown in Table 8, in which the
measurements of a hundred fully-developed leaves, made in
March 1921, are recorded.

At the end of 1920 the roots were exposed to a depth of 2 feet
in order to ascertain the effect ofthe extra aeration on the develop-
ment of the superficial system. The results were interesting. In
all cases the superficial ronts were much larger and better developed

TABLE 8
The reduction in leaf size under grass

Grass with aeration
_ Grass trenches Cultivated

cm. cm. cm,

Plum . . . . Z2QX II 46x17 ° 71x29
Peach . soe . TIX VB B-4X 23 IV4X 3
Guava . . . . Bixg2 10°6X 44 11:3X 44
Mango . . + . 11:2X 249 13°7X 38 20:9X 55
Litchi . . . . &9x 24 11:5X 34 12:2X 3'5
Lime . . . . 38x 1-6 2X21 4X 9°4
Loquat . . . . Trees dead 16-4X 46 22°1X5°9

than those under grass, except in the guava where no differences
in size could be detected. The roots were attracted by the trenches,
often branching considerably in the soil at the side of the trenches
themselves. The aeration trenches are made use of only during
the monsoon phase. After the break of the rains, new active roots
are always found in or near the trenches first, after which a certain |
amount of development takes place under the grass.

The deep root system of the trees provided with aeration trenches
behaved exactly like the controls.

THE RESULTS OBTAINED
The general results obtained with clean cultivation, grass, and
grass with aeration trenches are shown in Plate IV, in which
representative trees from the various plots have been drawn to
scale. The drawings give a good idea of the main results of the
experiment, namely: (1) the extremely deleterious effect of grass
on young trees, (2) the less harmful effect of the same treatment
KR

[PAG 155]
2

1390 HEALTH, INDISPOSL’IION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICUL'TURE

on mature trees; (3) the partial recovery which sometimes takes
place from the acration trenches; and (4) the exceptional nature
of the results with the guava, where the trees are able to grow
under grass, but with reduced vigour, and where the aeration
trenches have had little or no effect.

As would be expected from these results even a temporary
removal of the grass cover has a profound effect. Whenever the
roots of a tree under grass are exposed (for which purpose the grass
has to be removed for a few days) there is an immediate increase
in growth, accompanied by the formation of larger and darker- .
coloured leaves. The effect is cleafly visible in the foliage above
the excavation for as long as two years, but the rest of the tree is
not affected.

THE CAUSE OF THE HARMFUL EFFECT OF GRASS
‘The examination of the root system of these eight species sug-
gested that the first step in working out the cause of the harmful
effect of grass would be to make a periodical examination of the
soil gases. Determinations of the amount of CO, in the soil-air
at a depth of 9 to 12 inches were carriéd out during 1919 under
grass, under grass with aeration trenches, and under cultivated soil.
About 10 litres of air were drawn out Of the soil at each deter-
mination and passed through standard baryta which was after-
wards titrated in the ordinary way. The 1919 results are given
in Table 9 (p. 191) and are set out graphically in-Fig. 5 (p. 132).
The results of 1920 and 1921 confirm these figures‘in all respects.
‘ Table 9 shows that during the monsoon the volume of carbon
dioxide in the pore spaces under grass is increased about fivefold
in comparison with the soil-air of cultivated land. As this gas is
far more soluble in water than oxygen, the amounts of carbon
dioxide actually dissolved in the water-films in which the root-
hairs work would be much higher than the figures in the table
suggest. ©
The. production of large amounts of carbon dioxide i in the soil-
air during the rains would also affect the formation of humus,
nitrification, and the mycorrhizal relationship, all of which depend
on adequate aeration. Considerable progress was made in the
investigation of the supply of combined nitrogen. At all periods

[PAG 156]
SOIL AERATION 131

of the year, except at the break of the rains, the amount of nitric
nitrogen in the upper 18 inches of soil under grass varicd from
10 to 20 per cent. of that met with in the cultivated plots. When
the shortage of nitrogen in the case of the guava was made up by
means of sulphate of ammonia during the rains of 1923, the trees

TABLE 9

Percentage by volume of carbon dioxide in the soil-gas, under grass and
clean cultivation, Pusa, 1919*

Plot no. 2
grassed but Rainfall in
Date and month when soil- partially Plot no. 3 inches since
gas was aspirated and Plot no. 1 aerated by surface January sst,
analysed grassed trenches cultivated | 1919
January 13, 14, and 17 . 0°444 0312 0269 Nil
February 20 and 21 . 0472 0°320 0253, 1:30
March 21 and 22 . . 0427 0223 0197 1°33
April 23 and 24. . 0454 0-262 0-203 2-69
May16and17 . . 0271 0-257 0°133 3:26
June 17 and 18. . 0-341 0274 0249 453
July 17 and 18. . 1+540 1-090 0-304 14:61
August 25 and 26 . . 1590 0836 0401 23:29
September 19 and 20. 1-908 0-931 07450 30°67
October 21 and 22 . 1:297 0-602 0365 3290
November 14 and 15. 0-853 0456 0261 32°90
December 22 and 23. i 0-398 0327 0-219 32:92

under grass at once responded and produced fruit and foliage
hardly distinguishable in size from the controls.

In the case of the litchi and loquat, the roots of which are unable
to aerate themselves in the rains by forcing their way through the
grass to the surface, heavy applications of combined nitrogen
improved the growth, but a distinctly harmful effect remained—
the manurcd trees as regards size and colour of the Icaves, time of
flowering, and production of new shoots occupying an inter-
mediate position between the unmanured trees under grass and
those under clean cultivation. These results are very similar to
those obtained with apples at Cornell. At both places grass Ied to
the disappearance of nitrates in the soil and restricted root de-
velopment. The effect was only partially removed by the addition

* The determinations were carried out by Mr. Jatindra Nath Mukerjee of the
Chemical Section, Pusa.