=== An Agricultural Testament - Albert Howard.pdf — CHUNK 1/14 ===
Chars: 43,278 | Offset: 0

[PAG 1]
OXFORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS
AMEN HOUSE, E.C. 4
London Edinburgh Glasgow

È New York Toronto
Melbourne Capetown Bombay
Calcotta Madras
HUMPHREY. MILFORD
PUBLISRER TO THE
UNIVENSITY

[PAG 2]
AN
AGRICULTURAL
TESTAMENT

BY

SIR ALBERT HOWARD, C.LE., M.A.

Formerly Director of the Institute of Plant Industry
Indore, and Agricultural Adviser to States
in Central India and Rajputona

HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON NEW YORK TORONTO

[PAG 3]
First Published . . . . . 1940
Second Impression. . . . -1942
Third Impression . . . .. 1943
Fourth Impression. . . . 1944
Fifth Impression +. . +. . 1945

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN

[PAG 4]
TO

GABRIELLE
WHO IS NO MORE

[PAG 6]
The Earth, that’s Nature’s Mother, is her tomb;
What is her burying grave, that is her womb.
° Romeo and Fulist.

And-Nature, the old nurse, took
The child upon her knee,

Saying: ‘Here is a story-book
Thy Father has written for thee.’

‘Come, wander with me,’ she said,
‘Into regions yet untrod ;
And read what is still unread
In the manuscripts of God.’
. LONGFELLOW
The Fiftieth Birthday of Agassiz.

[PAG 8]
PREFACE

re the Industrial Revolution the processes of growth have

been speeded up to produce the food and raw materials needed
by the population and the factory. Nothing effective has been done
to replace the loss of fertility involved in this vast increase in crop
and animal production. The consequences have been disastrous.
Agriculture has become unbalanced: the Jand is in revolt: diseases
of all kinds are on the increase: in many parts of the world Nature
is removing the worn-out soil by means of erosion.

The-purpose of this book is to draw attention to the destruction
of the earth’s capital—the soil; to indicate some of the consequences
of this; and to suggest methods by which the lost fertility can be
restored and maintained. This ambitious project is founded on
the work and experience of forty years, mainly devoted to agri-
cultural research in the West Indies, India, and Great Britain. It
is the continuation of an earlier bock—The Waste Products of
Agriculture, published in 1931—in which the Indore method for
maintaining soil fertility by the manufacture of humus from

. vegetable and animal wastes was described.
During the last nine years the Indore Process has been taken
- up at many centres all over the world. Much additional informa-
tion on the role of humus in agriculture bas been obtained. I have
also had the leisure to bring under review the existing systems of
farming as well as the organization and purpose of agricultural
research, Some attention has also been paid to the bio-dynamic
methods of agriculture in Holland and in Great Britain, but I
‘remain unconvinced that the disciples of Rudolph Steiner can offer
any real explanation of natural laws or have yet provided any
practical examples which demonstrate the value of their theories.

The general results of all this are set out in this my Agricultural
Testament. No attempt has been made to disguise the conclusions
reached or to expréss them in the language of diplomacy. On
the contrary, they have been stated with the utmost frankness. It
is -hoped that they will be discussed with the same freedom and
that they will open up new lines of thought and eventually lead
to effective action.

[PAG 9]
x. PREFACE ;

It would not have been possible to have written this book
without the help and encouragement of a former colleague in
India, Mr. George Clarke, C.L.E., who held the post of Director
of Agriculture in the United Provinces for ten years (1921-31).
He very generously placed at my disposal his private notes on the
agriculture of the Provinces covering a period of over twenty
years, and has discussed with me during the last three years
practically everything in this book. He read many of the Chapters
when they were first drafted, and made a number of suggestions
which have been incorporated i in the text.

Many who are engaged in practical agriculture. all over the
world and who have adopted the Indore Process have contributed
to this book. In a few cases mention of this assistance has been
made in the text. It is impossible to refer to all the correspon-
dents who have furnished progress reports and have so freely
reported their results. These provided an invaluable collection
of facts and observations ‘which has amply confirmed my own
experience.

Great stress has been laid on a hitherto undiscovered factor in
nutrition—the mycorrhizal association—the living fungous bridge
between humus in the soil and the sap of plants. The existence of
such a symbiosis was first suggested to me on reading an account
of the remarkable results with conifers, obtained by Dr. M. C.
Rayner at Warcham in Dorset in connexion with the operations -
of the Forestry Commission. If mycorrhiza occurs generally inthe
plantation industries and also in our crops, an explanation of such
things as the development of quality, disease resistance, and the
running out of the variety, as well as the slow deterioration of the
soil which follows the use of artificial manures, would be provided.
I accordingly took steps to collect a wide range of specimens likely
to contain mycorrhiza, extending over the whole of tropical and
temperate agriculture. I am indebted to Dr: Rayner and to Dr.
Ida Levisohn for the detailed examination of this material. They,
‘have furnished me with many valuable and suggestive technical
reports. For the interpretation of these laboratory results, as set
out in the following pages, I am mysclf solely responsible.

I am indebted to a number of Societies for permission to
reproduce information and illustrations which have already been

[PAG 10]
. PREFACE xi
published. Two other organizations have allowed me to incor-
porate. results which might well have been régarded as confiden-
tial. The Royal Society of London has permitted me to reprint,
in the Chapter on Soil Aeration, a précis of an illustrated paper
which appeared in their Proceedings. The Royal Society of Arts
has provided the blocks for the section on sisal waste. The Royal
Sanitary Institute has agreed to the reproduction in full of a paper
read at the Health Congress, held at Portsmouth in July 1938.
The British Medical Journal has placed at my disposal the informa-
tion contained in an article by Dr. Lionel J. Picton, O.B.E. The
publishers of Dr. Waksman’s monograph on Humus have allowed

‘me to reprint two long extracts relating to the properties of
humus. Messrs. Arthur Guinness, Sons & Co., Limited, have
agrecd to the publication of the details of the composting of town
wastes in their hop garden at Bodiam. Messrs. Walter Duncan
& Co. have allowed the Manager of the Gandrapara Tea Garden
to contribute an illustrated article on the composting of wastes
on this fine estate. Captain J. M. Moubray has sent me a very
interesting summary of the work he is doing at Chipoli in Southern
Rhodesia, which is given in Appendix B. .

In making the Indore -Process widely known, a number of
journals have rendered yeoman service. In Great Britain The
Times and the Journal of the Royal Society of Arts have published
a regular series of letters and articles. In Scuth Africa the
Farmers Weekly has from the beginning urged the agricultural
community to increase the humus content of the soil. In Latin
America the planters owe much to the Revista del Instituto de
Defensa del Café de Costa Rica.

Certain of the largest tea companies in London, Messrs. James
Finlay & Co., Walter Duncan & Co., the Ceylon Tea Plan-
tations Company, Messrs. Octavius Steel & Co., and others,
most generously made themselves responsible over a period of two
years for a large part of the office expenses connected with the
working ‘out and application to the plantation industries of the

_ Indore Process. They also defrayed the expenses of a tour to the
tea estates of India and Ceylon in 1937-8. These arrangements
were very kindly made on my behalf by Mr. G. H. Masefield,
Chairman of the Ceylon Tea Plantations Company.

[PAG 11]
xii i PREFACE
In the work of reducing to order the vast mass of correspon-
dence and notes on soil fertility, which have accumulated, and in
getting the book into its final shape, I owe much to the ability
and devotion of my private secretary, Mrs. V. M. Hamilton.

A. H.
BLACKHEATH,

1 January 1940

[PAG 12]
CONTENTS

I, INTRODUCTION . . . - .
Nature’s METHODS oF Sor. MANAGEMENT .
Tse AGRICULTURE or THE Nations Wrick Have Passen
Away . . . . . .
Tue Practices or THE ORIENT. -
‘Tue Acricurrura, METHODS oF THE Occment

Part I

THE PART PLAYED BY SOIL FERTILITY IN
AGRICULTURE

II. THE NATURE OF SOIL FERTILITY
III. THE RESTORATION OF FERTILITY .

Parr II
THE INDORE PROCESS

V. THE INDORE PROCESS .
Tre Raw MarteRIALS NeEDED
Prrs Versus Heaps . . - . .
Carona THE Hears or Prrs . . . .
TurNING THE Compost . . . .
Tue SrorAGE or Humus . . - .

V. PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF THE INDORE
PROCESS . . '

Tea . .
Sucar-Cane -
Corton . .

SrsaL

Maze

Rice :

‘VEGETABLES è .

VINE .

VI. DEVELOPMENTS OF THE INDORE PROCESS
GREEN-MANURING . .
THE SAFEGUARDING OF Nrrrate Accusutarions
Tue Propuction or Humus
Tue SAFEGUARDING OF NITRATES FOLLOWED BY THE = MANU-
FACTURE OF Humus . . . .
Tue REFORM OF GREEN-MANURING -

(E)
n

39
4I
45
46

50
50

53
53

66
71

75
7

82
85

87

gi
93

95

[PAG 13]
xiv CONTENTS

VII. DEVELOPMENTS OF THE INDORE PROCESS, Cont.
GRASS-LAND MANAGEMENT .

VIII DEVELOPMENTS OF THE INDORE PROCESS, Cont.
_ THe Uniuization or Town Wastes - . -

Pane I Ur sr

96

104

HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASEIN AGRICULTURE

IX. SOIL AERATION . . . . .
Tre Som AERATION Facror IN RELATION, TO Grass AND
-TREES

The Root System of Deciduous Trées . . .
The Root System of Evergreens . . : -
The Harmful Effect of Grass. !

The Effect of Aeration Trenches on Young Trees Under

The Cause of the Harmful Effect of Grass
Forest Trees and Grass . . . .

Tre AERATION OF THE SUB-SOIL . . .

X. SOME DISEASES OF THE SOIL . vu .
Som Erosion . . "o. . .
THe FORMATION OF Axa Lanp . . .

0. XL THE RETREAT OF THE CROP AND THE ANIMAL
BEFORE THE PARASITE . . .

Humus AND DISEASE RESISTANCE . .
Tue MyCORRBIZAL ASSOCIATION AND Dnscase . .
Tue InvESTIGATIONS or To-MORROW

XII. SOIL FERTILITY AND NATIONAL HEALTH .

Part IV
AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH

XIII. A CRITICISM OF PRESENT-DAY AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH . .

. XIV. A SUCCESSFUL EXAMPLE OF AGRICULTURAL
Parr V

CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS
XV. A FINAL SURVEY La . . . .

116

117°
120
124
125,

128
190
132
136

140

140
147

156
165
166
168

171

181

200

219

[PAG 14]
CONTENTS

APPENDIXES
. A. Composr MANUFACTURE ON A TEA ESTATE IN BENGAL.
B. Composr Marine AT CiipoLI, SOUTHERN RHODESIA .

C. Tue MANUFACTURE or Humus FROM THE WASTES OF THE Town
AND THE VILLAGE .

INDEX

225
229

235
243

[PAG 15]
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

PLATES - .
. Conversion of Sisal Waste. . . Pacing page
x Conversion of Sisal Waste. * . . . .

III. Rainfall, Temperature, Humidity, and Drainage, Pusa, 1922 .
IV. The Harmful Effect of Grass on Fruit Trees, Pusa, 1923 .

V. Plum (Primus communis, Huds.) . . . .
‘VI. Guava (Psidium Guyava, L.) . . .
VII. Nitrate Accumulation in the Gangetic Altuvium . .
VIII. Nitrate Accumulation, Green-manure Experiment, Shah-
jahanpur, 1928-9 . - -

TX. Green-manure Experiment, Shahjahanpur, 1928-9 . .

X. Plan of the Compost Factory, Gandrapara Tea Estate .

XI. Composting at Gandrapara . . . . .
XII. Composting at Gandrapara . -
XIII. Compost-making at Chipoli, Southern Rhodesia .

FIGURES
1. A model lay-out for 20 cottages . . . - .
2. Plan of experimental fruit arca, Pusa . . . .

3. Hot weather and monsoon foliage of the custard apple .
4. The effect of burrowing rats on the growth of the plum under

grass . . . -
5. Carbon dioxide in soil atmosphere, Pusa, 1919 - . .
6. Trench system at Shahjahanpur . . . : .

7. Earthing up sugar-cane at Shahjahanpur, July roth, 1919 -
8. Plan and working details of composting pits at Tollygunge,

Calcutta . . . - .
g. Long-handled drag-rake and fork used in composting . .
10. Plan of compost factory at + Tollygunge, Calcutta, after one month’s
use . . .

11, Plan of a simple composting trench fora village .

76
78

“116

120
128
132
208

212
216
226

"926

228
232

114
119
123

128
132
205
206

236
238

239

[PAG 16]
CHAPTER I
— INTRODUCTION

TE maintenance of the fertility of the soil is the first condition
of any permanent system of agriculture. In the ordinary
processes of crop production fertility is steadily lost: its continuous —
restoration by means of manuring and soil management is there-
fore imperative. ;

In the study of soil fertility the first step is to bring under review i
the various systems of agriculture which so far have been evolved.
These fall into four main groups: (1) the methods of Nature—the
supreme farmer—as seen in the primeval forest, in the prairie, and
in the ocean; (2) the agriculture of the nations which have passed
away; (3) the practices of the Orient, which have been almost
unaffected by Western science; and (4) the methods in vogue in
regions like Europe and North America to which a large amount -
of scientific attention has been paid during the last hundred years.

NATURE'S METHODS OF SOIL MANAGEMENT

Little or no consideration is paid in the literature of agriculture
to the means by which Nature manages land and conducts her
water culture. Nevertheless, these natural methods of soil manage-
ment must form the basis of all our studies of soil fertility.

What are the main principles underlying Nature’s agriculture?
These can most easily be seen in operation in our woods and
forests.

Mixed farming is the rule: plants are always found with animals: -
many, species of plants and of animals all live together.’ In the
forest every form of animal life, from mammals to the simplest-
invertebrates, occurs. The vegetable kingdom exhibits a similar
range: there is never any attempt at monoculture: mixed crops
and mixed farming are the rule.

The soil is always protected from the direct action of sun, rain,
and wind. In this care of the soil strict economy is the watchword:
nothing is lost. The whole of the energy of sunlight is made use of
by the foliage of the forest canopy and of the undergrowth. The
leaves also break up the rainfall into fine spray so that it can the

B

[PAG 17]
2 INTRODUCTION

more easily be dealt with by the litter ot piant and animal remains
which provide the last line of defence of the precious soil. These
methods of protection, so effective in dealing with sun-and rain,
also reduce the power of the strongest winds to a gentle air current.

The rainfall in particular is carefully conserved. A large portion
is retained in the surface soil: the excess is géntly transferred to the
subsoil and in due course to the streams and rivers. The fine
spray created by the foliage is transformed by the protective
ground litter into thin films of water which move slowly down-
wards, first into the humus layer and then into the soil and sub-
soil. These Jatter have been made porous in two ways: by the
creation of a well-marked-crumb structure and by a network of
drainage and aeration chanhels made by earthworms and other
burrowing animals. The pore space of the forest’soil is at its maxi-
mum so that there is a large internal soil surface over which the
thin films of water can creep. There is also ample humus for the
direct absorption of moisture. The excess drains away slowly by
way of the subsoil. There is remarkably little run-off, even from
the primeval rain forest.. When this occurs it is practically clear
water. Hardly any soil is removed. Nothing in the nature of soil
erosion occurs. The streams and rivers in forest areas are always .
perennial because of the-vast quantity of water in slow*transit
between the rainstorms and the sea. There is therefore little or no -
drought in forest areas because so much of the rainfall is retained
exactly where it is needed. There is no waste anywhere.

The forest manures itself. It makes its own humus and supplies
itself with minerals. If we watch a piece of woodland we find that
a gentle accumulation of mixed vegetable and animal residues is
constantly taking place on the ground and that these wastes are .
being converted by fungi and bacteria into humus. The processes
involved in the early stages of this transformation depend through-
out on oxidation: afterwards they take place in the absence of air.
They arc sanitary. There is no nuisance of any kind—no smell,
no flies, no dustbins, no incinerators, no artificial sewage system, |
no water-borne diseases, no town councils, and no rates. On the

_ contrary, the forest affords a place for the ideal summer holiday:-
sufficient shade and an abundance of pure fresh air. Nevertheless,
all over the surface of the woods the conversion of vegetable and

[PAG 18]
INTRODUCTION 3

animal wastes into humus is never so rapid and so intense as during
the holiday months—July to September.

The mineral matter needed by the trees and the undergrowth
is obtained from the subsoil. This is collected in dilute solution in
water by the deeper roots, which also help in anchoring the trees.
The details of root distribution and the manner in which the sub-
soil is thoroughly combed for minerals are referred to in a future
chapter (p. 135). Even in soils markedly deficient in phosphorus
trees have no difficulty in obtaining ample supplies of this clement.

- Potash, phosphate, and other minerals are always collected in situ
and carried by the transpiration current for use in the green leaves.
Afterwards they are either used in growth .or deposited on the
floor of the forest in the form of vegetable waste—one of the
constituents needed in the synthesis of humus. This humus is
again utilized by the roots of the trees. Nature’s farming, as seen
in the forest, is charaeterized by two things: (1) a constant circula-
tion of the mineral matter absorbed by the trees; (2) a constant
addition of new mineral matter from the vast reserves held in the
subsoil. There is therefore no need to add phosphates: there is no
necessity for moré potash salts. No mineral deficiencies of any
kind occur. The supply of all the manure needed is automatic
and is provided cither by humus or by the soil. There is a natural
division of the subject into organic and inorganic. Humus pro-
vides the organic manure: the soil the mineral matter.

The soil always carries a large fertility reserve. There is no
hand to mouth existence about Nature's farming. The reserves
are carried in the upper layers of the soil in the form of humus.
Yet any useless accumulation of humus is avoided because it is
automatically mingled with the upper soil by the activities of
burrowing animals such as earthworms and insects. The extent
of this enormous reserve is only realized when the trees are cut
down and the virgin land is used for agriculture. When plants
like tea, coffee, rubber, and bananas arc grown on recently cleared
land, good crops can be raiscd without manure for ten years or
more. Like all good administrators, therefore, Nature carries

strong liquid reserves effectively invested. There is no squandering
of these reserves to be seen anywhere.

The crops and live stock look after themselves. Nature has

[PAG 19]
4 ‘INTRODUCTION

never found it necessary to design-the equivalent of the spraying
machine and the poison spray for the control ofinsect and fungous
pests. There is nothing in the nature of vaccines and serums for
the protection of the live stock. It is true that all kinds of diseases _
are to be found here and there among the plants and animals of
the forest, but these never assume large proportions. The principle
followed is that the plants and animals can very well protect them-
selves even when such things as parasites are to be found in their
midst. Nature’s rule in these matters is to live and let live.

“If we study the prairie and the ocean we find thatsimilar prin-
ciples are followed. The grass carpet deals-with the rainfall very
much as the forest does. There is little or no soil erosion: the
run-off is practically tlear water. Humus is again stored in the
- upper soil. The best of the grassland areas of North America
carried a mixed herbage which maintained vast herds of bison.
No veterinary service was in existence for keeping these ‘animals
alive. When brought into cultivation by the early settlers, so great
was the store of fertility that these prairie soils yielded heavy crops
of wheat for many years without live stock and without manure.

In lakes, rivers, and the sea mixed farming is again the rule: a
great variety of plants and animals are found living together: -
nowhere does one find monoculture. The vegetable and animal
wastes are again dealt with by effective methods. Nothing is
wasted. Humus again plays an important part and is found every-

_ where in solution, in suspension, and in the deposits of mud. The
sea, like the forest and the prairie, manures itself.

* The main characteristic of Nature’s farming can therefore be
summed up in a few words. Mother earth never attempts to farm
without live stock; she always raises mixed crops; great pains are
taken to preserve the soil and to prevent erosion; the mixed
vegetable and animal wastes are converted into humus; there is
no waste; the processes of growth and the processes of decay
balance one another; ample provision is made to maintain large
reserves of fertility; the greatest care is taken to store the rain-
fall; both plants and animals are left to protect themselves against
disease. ,

In considering the various man-made systems of agriculture,
which so far have been devised. it will be interesting to see how far

[PAG 20]
+

os ì INTRODUCTION 5

«Nature's principles have been adopted, whether they have ever

been improved upon, and what happens when they are disregarded.

THE AGRICULTURE OF THE NATIONS WHICH HAVE
PASSED AWAY

The difficulties inherent in the study of the agriculture of the

‘ nations which are no more are obvious. Unlike their buildings,

‘ where it is possible from a critical study-of the buried remains of

cities to reproduce a picture of bygone civilizations, the fields of
the ancients have seldom been maintained. The land has either
gone back to forest or has been ‘used for one system of farming
after another.

In one case, however, the actual fields of a bygone people have
been preserved together with the irrigation methods by which
these lands were made productive. No written records, alas, have
come down to us of the staircase cultivation of the ancient Peru-
vians, perhaps one of the ‘oldest forms of Stone Age agriculture.
This arose either in mountains or in the upland areas under grass
because of the difficulty, before the discovery of iron, of removing
the dense forest growth. In Peru irrigated staircase farming seems
to have reached its highest known development. More than twenty
years ago the National Geographical Society of the United States
sent an expedition to study the relics of this ancient method of
agriculture, an account of which was published by O. F. Cook in
the Society’s Magazine of May 1916, under the title: ‘Staircase
Farms of the Ancients.’ The system of the megalithic people of
old Peru was to construct a stairway of terraced fields up the
slopes of the mountains, tier upon tier, sometimes as many as fifty
in number. The outer retaining walls of these terraces were made
of large stones which fit into one another with such accuracy that
even at the present day, like those of the Egyptian pyramids, a
knife blade cannot be inserted between them. After the retaining
wall was built, the foundation of the future field was prepared by

- means of coarse stones covered with clay. On this basis layers of

soil, several feet thick, originally imported from beyond the great
mountains, were super-imposed and then levelled for irrigation.
The final result was a small flat field with only just sufficient slope
for artificial watering. In other words, a series of huge flower pots,

[PAG 21]
6 INTRODUCTION - 2

each provided with ample drainage below; was prepared with
incredible labour by this ancient people for theit crops. Such were
the megalithic achievements in agriculture, beside’ which ‘our
undertakings sink into insignificance in face of what this vanished
race accomplished. “The narrow floors and steep walls of rocky
valleys that would appear utterly worthless and hopeless to our
engineers were transformed, literally made over, into fertile lands -
and were the homes of teeming populations in pre-historic days’
(O: F. Cook). The engineers of old Peru did what they did
through necessity because iron, steel, reinforced concrete, and the
modern power units had nòt been invented. The plunder of the
forest soil was beyond their reach.

These terraced fields had to be irrigated. Water had to be led .
to. them over immense distancés by means of aqueducts. Prescott
states that one which traversed the district of Condesuyu measured
between four and five hundred miles. Cook gives a photograph of
one of these channels as a thin dark line traversing a steep moun-
tain wall many hundreds of feet above the valley. -

These ancient methods of agriculture are represented at the
present day by the terraced cultivation of the Himalayas, of the
mountainous areas of China and Japan, and of the irrigated rice
fields so commor in the hills of South India, Ceylon, and the
Malayan Archipelago. Conway’s description, published in 1894,
of the terraces of Hunza on the North-West Frontier of India and
of the canal, carried for long distances across the face of precipices
to the one available supply of perennial water—the torrent from
the Ultor glacier—tallies almost completely with what he found

‘in 1gor in the Bolivian Andes. This distinguished scholar and

mountaineer considered that the native population of Hunza of
the present day is living in a stage of civilization that must bear
no little likeness to that of the Peruvians under Inca government.
An example of this ancient method -of farming has thus been
preserved through the ages. In a future chapter (p. 173) the
relation which exists between the nutritional value of the food

. grown on these irrigated terraces and the health of the people will

be discussed. This relic of the past is interesting from the point of
view of quality in food as well as from its historical value.
Some other-systems of agriculture of the past have come down

[PAG 22]
INTRODUCTION 7

to us in the form of written records which have furnished ample
material for constructive research. In the case of Rome in particu- .
lar a fairly complete account of the position of agriculture, from
the period-of the monarchy to the fall of the Roman Empire, is
available; the facts‘can be conveniently followed in the writings of
Mommsen, Heitland, and other scholars. In the case of Rome the
Servian Reform (Servius Tullius, 578-534 B.c.) shows very clearly
not only that the agricultural class “originally preponderated in
the State but also that an effort was made to maintain the collec-
tive body of freeholders as the pith and marrow of the community.
The conception that the constitution itself rested on the frechold
system permeated the whole policy of Roman war and conquest.
The aim of war was to increase the number ofits freehold members.
‘The vanquished community was either compelled to merge entirely
into the yeomanry of Rome, or, if not reduced to this extremity, it was
required, not to pay a war contribution or a-fixed tribute, but to cede
a portion, usually a third part, of its domain, which was thereupon
regularly occupied by Roman farms. Many nations have gained
victories and made conquests as the Romans did; but none has equalled
the Roman in thus making the ground he had won his own by the
sweat of his brow, and in securing by the ploughshare what had been
. gained by the lance. That which is gained by war may be wrested from
. the grasp by war again, but it is not so with the conquests made by the
“plough; whilst the Romans lost many battles, they scarcely ever on
making peace ceded Roman soil, and for this result they were indebted
to the tenacity with which the farmers clung to their fields and home-
steads. The-strength of man and of the State lies in their dominion
over the soil; the strength of Rome was built on the most extensive and
immediate mastery of her citizens over the soil, and on the compact
‘ unity of the body which thus acquired so firm a hold.’ (Mommsen.)
These splendid ideals did not persist. During the period which
elapsed between the union of Italy and the subjugation of Carthage,
a gradual decay of the farmers set in; the small-holdings ceased to
«yield any substantial clear return; the cultivators one by one faced
ruin; the moral tone and frugal habits of the earlier ages of the
‘ Republic were lost; the land of the Italian farmers became merged
into the larger estates. The landlord capitalist became the centre
of the subject. He not only produced at a cheaper rate than the
farmer because he had more land, but he began to use slaves.
The same space which in the olden time, when small-holdings

[PAG 23]
8 INTRODUCTION

prevailed, had supported from a hundred to a hundred and a finty
families was now occupied by one family of free persons and about
fifty, for the most part unmarried, slaves. ‘If this was the remedy
“by which the decaying national economy was to be restored to
vigour; it bore, unhappily, an aspect of extreme resemblance to
disease’ (Mommsen). The main causes of this decline appear
to have been fourfold: the constant drain on the manhood of the
country-side by the legions, which culminated in the two-long
wars with Carthage; the operations of the Roman capitalist land-
lords which ‘contributed quite as much as Hamilcar and Hannibal
to the decline in the vigour and the number of the Italian people’
(Mommsen); failure to work out a balanced agriculture between
crops and live stock and to maintain the fertility of the soil; the
employment of slaves instead of free labourers. During this period ~
the wholesale comrnerce of Latium passed into the hands of the
large landed proprietors who at the same time were the speculators
and capitalists. The natural conséquence was the destruction of
the middle classes, particularly of the small-holders, and: the
development of landed and moneyed lords on the one hand and
of an agricultural proletariat on the other. ‘The power of capital
was greatly enhanced by the growth of the class of tax-farmers
and contractors to whom the State farmed out its indirect revenues -
for a fixed sum. Subsequent political and social conflicts did not
give real relief to the agricultural community. Colonies founded
to secure Roman sovereignty over Italy provided farms for the
agricultural proletariat, but the root causes of the decline in
agriculture were not removed in spite of the efforts of Cato and
other reformers. A capitalist system of which the apparerit inter-
ests were fundamentally opposed to a sound agriculture remained
supreme. The last half of the second century saw degradation.and
more and more decadence. Then came Tiberius Gracchus and
the Agrarian Law with the appointment of an official commission
to counteract the diminution of the farmer class by the compre-

_ hensive establishment of new small-holdings from the whole Italian
landed property at the disposal of the State: eighty thousand new
Italian farmers were provided with land. These efforts to restore
agriculture to its rightful place in the State were accompanied by
many improvements in Roman agriculture which, ‘unfortunately,

[PAG 24]
INTRODUCTION ° 9

were most suitable for large estates. Land no longer able to pro-
duce corn became pasture; cattle now roamed over large ranches; *
the vine and the olive were cultivated with commercial success.
These systems of agriculture, however, had to be carried on with
slave labour, the supply of whith had to be maintained by constant
‘ importation. Such extensive methods of farming naturally failed
to supply sufficient food for the population of Italy. Other coun-
tries were.called upon to furnish essential foodstuffs; province after
© province was conquered to feed the growing proletariat with corn.
These areas in turn slowly yielded to the same decline which had
taken place in Italy. - Finally the wealthy classes abandoned the
depopulated remnants of the mother country and built themselves
_ a new capital at Constantinople. The situation had to be saved
by a migration to fresh lands. In their new capital the Romans
relied on the unexhausted fertility of Egypt as well as on that of
Asia Minor and the Balkan and Danubian provinces.

Judged by the ordinary standards of achievement the agricultural
history of the Roman Empire ended in failure due to inability to
realize the fundamental principle that the maintenance of soil
fertility coupled with the legitimate claims of the agricultural
population should never have been allowed to come in conflict
with the operations of the capitalist. The most important posses-
sion of a country is its population. If this is maintained in health
and vigour everything else will follow; if this is allowed to decline
nothing, not even great riches, can save the country from eventual
ruin. It follows, therefore, that the strongest possible support of
capital must always be a prosperous and contented country-side.
A working compromise between agriculture and finance should
therefore have been. evolved. Failure to achieve this naturally
ended in the ruin of both.

. THE PRACTICES OF THE ORIENT

. In the agriculture of Asia we find ourselves confronted with a
system of peasant farming which in essentials soon became stabi-
lized. What is happening to-day in the small fields of India and
China took place many centuries ago. There is here no need to
study historical records or to pay a visit to the remains of the
megalithic farming of the Andes. The agricultural practices of

[PAG 25]
10 . INTRODUCTION

the Orient have passed the supreme test—they are-almost as pers
manent as those of the primeval forest, of the prairie or of the ‘
ocean. The small-holdings of China, for example, are still main-.
taining a steady output and there is no loss of fertility after forty
centuries of management. What are the chief characteristics of .
this Eastern farming? i
The holdings are minute. Taking India as an example, the
relation between man power and cultivated area is referred to in
the Census Report of 1931 as follows: ‘For every agriculturalist there
is 2-9 acres of cropped land of which 0-65 of an acre is irrigated.
The corresponding figures of 1921 are 2-7 and o-61.’. These figures
illustrate how intense is the struggle for existence in this portion of
the tropics. These small-holdings are often cultivated by extensive
“methods (those suitable for large areas) which utilize neither the
full energies of man or beast nor the potential fertility of the soil.
If we turn to the Far East, to China and Japan, a similar system
of small-holdings is accompanied by an even more intense pressure
of population both human and bovine. In the introduction to
Farmers of Forty Centuries, King states that the three main islands of
Japan had in 1907 a population of 46,977,000, maintained on
20,000 square miles of cultivated fields. This is at the rate of 2,349 —
to the square mile or more than three people th each acre. In
addition, Japan fed on each square mile of cultivation a very large
animal population—69 horses and: 56 cattle, nearly all employed
in labour; 825 poultry; 13 swine, goats, and sheep. Although no
accurate statistics are available in China, the examples quoted by
King reveal a condition of affairs not unlike that in Japan. In the
Shantung Province a farmer with a family of twelve kept one
donkey, one-cow, and two pigs on 2°5 acres, of cultivated land—'
a density of population at the rate of 3,072 people, 256 donkeys,
256 cattle, and 512 pigs per square mile. The average of seven
Chinese holdings visited gave a maintenance capacity of 1,783
people, 212 cattle or donkeys, and 399 pigs—nearly 2,000 con-
sumers and 400 rough food transformers per square mile of farmed
land. In comparison with these remarkable figures, the corre-
sponding statistics for 1900 in the case of the United States per
square mile were: population-61, horses and mules go...
Food and forage crops are predominant. The primary function

[PAG 26]
INTRODUCTION . II

of Eastern agriculture is to supply the cultivators and their cattle
with food. This automatically follows because of the pressure of
the population on the land: the main hunger the soil has to
appease is-that of the stomach. A subsidiary hunger is that of the
machine which needs raw materials for manufacture. This extra
hunger is new but has developed considerably since the opening
of the Suez Canal in 1869 (by which the small fields of the culti-
vator have been brought into effective contact with the markets
of the West) and the establishment of local industries like cotton
and jute. To both these hungers soil fertility has to respond. We
know from Jong experience that the fields of India can respond to
the hunger of the stomach. Whether they can fulfil the added
-demands of the machine remains to be seen. The Suez Canal has
only been in operation for seventy years. The first cotton mill in
India was opened in 1818 at Fort Gloster, near Calcutta. The
jute industry of Bengal has grown up within a century. Jute was
first exported in 1838. The first jute mill on the Hoogly began
operations in 1855. These local industries as well as the export
trade in raw products for the use of the factories of the West are
an extra drain on soil fertility. Their future well-being and indeed
their very existence is only possible provided adequate steps arc
taken to maintain this fertility. There is obviously no point in
establishing cotton and jute mills in India, in founding trading
agencies like those of Calcutta and in building ships for the con-
veyance of raw products unless such enterprises are stable and
permanent. It would be folly and an obvious waste of capital to
pursue such activities if they are founded only on the existing store
_of soil fertility. All concerned in the hunger of the machine—
government, financiers, manufacturers, and distributors—must
see to it that the fields of India are equal to the new burden which
has been thrust upon her during the last fifty years or so. The
demands of commerce and industry on the one hand and the
fertility of the soil on the other must be maintained in correct
relation the one to the other.

The response of India to the two hungers—the stomach and the
machine—will be evident from a study of Table 1, in which the
area in acres under food and fodder crops is compared with that
under money crops.

[PAG 27]
<a è

2 - | INTRODUCTION

The chief food crops in order of importance are rice, pulses,
millets, wheat, and fodder crops. The money crops are more
varied; cotton and oil seeds are the most important, followed by
jute and other fibres, tobacco, tea, coffee, and opium. It will be

TABLE -I
* Agricultural Statistics of British India, 1995-6

Area, in acres, under food and fodder crops

Rice 7. du . . . . . + 79,888,000
‘Millets- . . . . . . - . . + 38,144,000
Wheat . . . . . . . . + 25,150,000
* Gram . . . . + - . . - 14,897,000
Pulses and other food grains Le . . . - 29,792,000
Fodder crops . . . . oe . . + 10,791,000
Condiments, spices, fruits, vegetables, and miscellaneous food
_ crops . . . . LU. . . . - 8,308,000
Barley . . . . è . . . . 6,178,000
Maize . . . . . . . . . . 6,211,000
~ Sugar. . . . . . . . . - 4,038,000
Total, food and fodder crops. : . . . + 223,397,000
Area, in acres, under money crops ;
Cotton . «o . . . . - . . 15,761,000
Oil seeds, chiefly ground-nuts, sesamum, rape, mustard, and .
linseed . . . 2°. - . . 15,662,000
Jute and other fibres . . . . - . 2,706,000
Dyes, tanning materials, drugs, narcotics, and miscellaneous
money crops . . . . . - - *+ 1,458,000
Tobacco. . . IA 1,230,000
Tea . . 2 T. . . . . . 787,000
. Coffee . . DI . . - . . - 97,000
Indigo . eee . . . . . . 40,000
Opium . . ESA . . . 10,000
Total, money crops . . . . . tal . + 37:751,000

seen that food and fodder crops comprise 86 per cent. of the total
area under crops and that money crops, as far as extent is con- .
cerned, are less important, and constitute only one-seventh of the
total cultivated area. — ”

. One interesting change in the production of Indian food-crops
has taken place during the last twenty-five years. The output of
sugar used to be insufficient-for the towns, and large quantities
were imported from Java, Mauritius, and the continent of Europe.
To-day, thanks to the work at Shahjahanpur in the United Pro-

[PAG 28]
INTRODUCTION 13

vinces, the new varieties of cane bred at Coimbatore and the
- protection now enjoyed by the sugar industry, India is almost
self-supporting as far as sugar is concerned. The pre-war average
amount of sugar imported was 634,000 tons; in 1937-8 the total
had fallen to 14,000 tons. .

Mixed crops are the rule. In this respect the cultivators of the .
Orient have followed Nature's method as seen in the primeval
forest. Mixed cropping is perhaps most universal when the cereal
crop is the main constituent. Crops like millets, wheat, -barley,
and maize are mixed with an appropriate subsidiary pulse, some-
times a species that ripens much later than the cereal. The pigeon
pea (Cajanus indicus Spreng.), perhaps the most important legumi-
nous crop of the Gangetic alluvium, is grown either with millets
or with maize, The mixing of cereals and pulses appears to help
both crops. When the two grow together the character of the
growth improves. Do the roots of these crops excrete materials
useful to each other? Is the mycorrhizal association found in the
roots of these tropical legumes and cereals the agent involved in
this excretion? Science at the moment is unable to answer these
questions: she is only now beginning to investigate them. Here
we have another instance where the peasants of the East have
anticipated and acted-upon the solution of one of the problems
which Western science is only just beginning to recognize. What-
ever may be the reason why crops thrive best when associated in
suitable combinations, the fact remains that mixtures gencrally
give better results than monoculture. This is seen in Great Britain
‘ in the growth of dredge corn, in mixed crops of wheat and

beans, vetches and rye, clover and rye-grass, and in intensive

vegetable growing .under glass. The produce raised under

Dutch: lights has noticeably increased since the mixed crop-

ping of the Chinese. vegetable growers of Australia has been

copied.!

A balance between live stock and crops is always maintained.
Although crops are generally more important than animals in
Eastern agriculture, we seldom or never find crops without animals.
This is because oxen are required for cultivation and buffaloes for

1 Mr. F. A. Secrett was, I believe, the first to introduce this system on a Sarge scale
into Great Britain. He informed me that he saw it for the first ime at Melbourne.