=== An Agricultural Testament - Albert Howard.pdf — CHUNK 11/14 ===
Chars: 44,885 | Offset: 446,258



How does this research organization strike the tillers of the soil”
for wliose benefit it has been created? The farmers complain that -
the research workers are out of touch with farming needs and’
conditions; that the results of research are. buried in learned
periodicals and expressed in unintelligible language; that these
papers deal with fragments of the subject chosen haphazard; that
the organization of research is so cumbersome that the average
farmer cannot obtain a prompt answer to an inquiry and that
there are no demonstration farms at which practical solutions of -
local problems are to be seen.

There seems to be only one effective answer to these objections.
The experiment station workers should take their own advice and
try out their results. The fruits of this research should be
forthcoming on the land itself. All the world over this simple
method of publication never fails to secure the respect and atten-
tion of the farming community; their response to such messages
is always generous and immediate. In Great Britain, however,
the retort of the administration\takes another line. The idea is
fostered that the experiment stations are arsenals of scientific
knowledge which actually needs explanation and dilution for the
farmer and his land to benefit. Thus in dealing with this point
the PEP Report states: ‘One of the principal tasks of the adminis-
trator is to ensure thattthe general body of scientific knowledge,
including recent results of the research workers’ efforts, is brought
| to the farmer in such a way that he can understand it and apply it

on his farm.’ The most effective way of doing this is for the
organization to demonstrate, in a practical way for all to.see, the
value of some, at any rate, of these researches. This simple
remedy will silence the critics and scoffers; any delay in furnishing
- it will only add fuel to the fire. After all, a research organization
which costs the nation £700,000 a year cannot afford to have its
operations called in'question by the very men for whose benefit

[PAG 218]
A CRITICISM OF PRESENT-DAY AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH IQI

it has been designed. The complaints of the farming community
must be removed. .

A system not unlike that just described in Great Britain has
been adopted in the Empire generally. There is, however, one
* interesting difference. The official machinery is comparatively
simple; the multiplication of agencies and supervisory com-
mittees is not so pronounced; the step from the Treasury to the
farmer is much shorter. When, however, we come to the research
proper, the system is very similar to that which obtains in Grcat
Britain. There is the same tendency to divide research into two
groups—fundamental and local; to rely on the piecing together
of fragments of science; to“extol the advantages of co-operation;
to adopt the team rather. than the individual. It is the exception
rather than the rule to find an investigation in the hands of one
competent'investigator, provided with land, ample means, and
complete freedom. °

The completion of an imperial chain of experiment stations for
fundamental research was emphasized by a Conference! which
met in London in 1927. The financial depression, which set in
soon after the Report appeared, interfered with this scheme. No -
additions to the two original links of the chain of five or six super-
Research Institutes contemplated—sometimes irreverently re-
ferred to as the ‘chain of pearls’—have been added to the one
in the West Indies (Trinidad) and the other in East Africa
(Amani). vi

Two examples will suffice to illustrate the methods now being
employed in this fundamental research work. These are taken
from a recent paper by Sir Geoffrey Evans, C.LE., entitled ‘Re-
search and Training in Tropical Agriculture’, which appeared in
the Journal of the Royal Society of Arts of February roth, 1939.
Sir Geoffrey selected the current work on cacao and bananas
when explaining how research is conducted at the Imperial
College of Tropical Agriculture in Trinidad. He laid great stress
on the merits of team work, a method of investigation which we
must now examine. These Trinidad examples of research do
not stand alone. They resemble what is going on all over the

* Report of the Imperial Agricultural Research Conferesce, H.M. Stationery Office,
London, 1927.

[PAG 219]
192 AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH

Empire, including India. Similar work can be collected by the
‘basketful. °

In 1930 a study of cacao was commenced in Trinidad in two |
directions—botanical and chemical. After a preliniinary eximina-
tion of the crop, which is made up of a bewildering number of
types, varying widely in fruitfulness and quality, a hundred special
trees were selected as a basis for improvement. As cacao does not
breed true from seed, methods of vegetative reproduction by
means of cuttings and bud wood were first studied. The mechan-
ism of pollination, however, showed that cacao is frequently,
self-sterile and that many of the special trees required to be cross-
pollinated before they could set seed. Suitable pollen parents had
then to be found. Manurial experiments on conventional lines
led to numerous field experiments all over the island as well as to
a detailed soil survey. The biochemical study of the cacao bean
produced results described as intricate and baffling; no correlation
between the tannin content and quality emerged. The Economics
Department of the. College investigated the decline of the industry
since the War, and established the interesting fact that a cacao
plantation reaches its peak in about twenty-five years and then
begins to decline. The causes of this decline have been studied
and the system of regenerating old plantations by supplying
vacancies with high-yielding types has been devised. As, however,
the decline of these cacao estates is more likely to be due to worn-
out soil than anything else, this method by itself is not likely to
succeed. Pests and diseases take their toll of cacao, so the ento-
mologists and mycologists were calléd in to deal with thrips—the
most serious insect pest—and the witch-broom disease—a fungous
pest which has done great damage in the West Indies.

The Trinidad investigations on the banana owe their origin
to the outbreak of the Panama disease (Fusarium " cubense) all over
the West Indies and the Central American Republics. When
the nature of the trouble was established by the mycologists, a
search for imniune and resistant varieties followed. This included
plant breeding, the investigation of the causes of seedlessness, the
raising of numerous seedlings, and the search for the ideal parent
from which to breed a new commercial banana which is disease-
resistant, seedless, of good quality, and capable of standing up to

[PAG 220]
. A GRITICISM OF PRESENT-DAY AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 193 -

transport conditions, In this work the assistance of the Royal
Botanic Gardens at Kew was enlisted; it involved the problem of
protecting the banana in the West Indies from disease, including
virus, when importing from Malaya (the home of the chief
banana of commerce—the Gros Michel) and other places the
material needed for the plant-breeding work. The problems of
ripening during transport, including a study of the respiration
processes during gas storage and the effect of humidity, and the
reason for chilling also received attention.

These interesting investigations, which have as their aim the
production of higher yields of better cacao and better bananas,
have been carried on by what is known as team work. They have
necessitated the services of botanists, chemists, mycologists, ento-
mologists and economists, and both have involved considerable
expense and much time.

As examples of the way in which the more difficult problems of
tropical agriculture are now approached by a number of workers,
they are typical of the methods of research everywhere. Many
aspects of the cacao‘and banana problems have been studied; the
methods of research have been clearly set out. The workers have
evidently spared no pains to achieve success. Nevertheless, the
results are negative. The paper under review suggests that matters
are still. very much in the programme stage; few if any tangible
results have been obtained; neither the cacao nor the banana
industry has been set on its feet.

If we take a wide view of these two problems and consider: (1) -
the present methods by which cacao and bananas are grown in the
West Indies; (2) the indications furnished by disease that all is
not well with these plantations, and (3) the best cxamples of cacao
and banana cultivation to be found in the East where, by means
of farm-yard manure only, heavy crops of fine, healthy produce
are obtained, the suspicion grows that at least some vital factors
have been forgotten in these Trinidad investigations. The specta-
cular response of cacao trees to humus scems to have been missed
altogether and no attention has been given to the significance of
the mycorrhizal association in the roots of both cacao trees and
bananas. In the cacao and banana plantations in the West Indics,
there is a want of balance between the crop and the animal. There

o

[PAG 221]
104 AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH

is insufficient live stock. There is a disquieting amount of disease
and general unthriftiness, which is associated with the absence of
conditions suitable for mycorrhizal formation.

Practical experience of the best banana and cacao cultivation
in India and Ceylon proves beyond all doubt that the two factors
which are essential, if satisfactory yields of high quality are to be
obtained and the plantations are to be kept healthy, are: (1) good
soil aeration, and (2) regular supplies of freshly prepared humus
from animal and vegetable wastes, which are needed to maintain
in effective operation the mycorrhizal association. Want of atten-
tion to either of these factors is at once followed by loss of quality,
by diminished returns, and finally by disease. A better way of
dealing with these West Indian problems would have been by
good farming methods, including a proper balance between crops
and live stock, and by the conversion of all available vegetable
and animal wastes into humus. - .

The Trinidad investigations are quoted as ‘an example which
can hardly fail to impress the student investigator with the
necessity for co-operation’. In reality all they show is how
employment can be found for a number of specialists for quite a
long time, and indeed what a lot of scientific work can be done by
competent workers with purely negative results as far as the yield
‘ and the quality of the crop are concerned.

It is not difficult to see the weakness of this method of approach.
The problem is never envisaged as a whole and studied in ‘the
‘field from every angle before research on some branch of science
is undertaken. Methods of crop improvement are now expected
to come from the laboratory and not from the field as they have
always done throughout farming history. The control ofthe team
is of necessity very loose. It is normally placed in the hands of
persons of administrative rather than practical experience and of
limited training in research methods. Often they have other
important duties and cannot give the time and thought required.
Unable themselves to make a correct diagnosis of the case in the
field, their only resource is to go on adding specialist after specialist
to their staff in the hope that the study of a fresh fragment of the
subject will lead them to.some solution. It is Almost certain that
‘ had the West Indian problems been tackled by one investigator

[PAG 222]
A CRITICISM OF PRESENT-DAY AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 195

with a real knowledge of farming combined with a wide training
in science, and had he been provided with the necessary land,
money, and facilities and with complete freedom in conducting
the investigation, Sir Geoffrey Evans would have told a very
different story. From the point of view. of the students at the
Trinidad College, it would have been still better to have used
these crops for illustrating both methods simultancously—the
banana studied by a single investigator, adequately equipped;
cacao by means of a team. In this way the relative merits of the
two methods could have been settled for all time. In all proba-
bility, two results would have been obtained: (1) the principle
that the researcher is the only thing that matters in research would
have been established; (2) team «work would have ceased to be
considered as an effective instrument of investigation.

Team work offers no solution for the evils which result from
fragmentation of a research problem. The net woven by the
team is often full of holes. Is the fragmentation of the problem
accompanied by any other disadvantages? This question is at
once answered if we examine any of the major problems of present-
day farming. Two British examples will suffice to prove that an
inevitable consequence of fragmentation and specialization is
loss of direction. Science then loses itself in a maze of detail.

The retreat of the potato crop before blight, celworm, and virus
is one of the most disquieting incidents in British agriculture. One
of our most important food crops cannot now be grown successfully,
on a field scale without a thin film of copper salts; a new rotation
of crops from which the potato is omitted until the cysts of the
celworm disappear from the soil; a frequent change of sced from
Scotland, Wales, or Northern Ireland. Evidently something is
Very wrong somewhere, because this, crop, when grown in
thousands of fertile kitchen gardens throughout the country, is
healthy, not discased. Agricultural science began by fragmenting

‘ this potato problem into a number of parts. Potato blight fell
within the province of the mycologist; a group of investigators
dealt with eclworm; a special experiment station was created for
virus disease; the breeding and testing of disease resistant varicties
was again a separate branch of the work; the manuring and

‘ general agronomy of the crop fell within the province of the

[PAG 223]
196 AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH

agriculturist. The multiplication of workers obscures rather
than clarifies this wide biological problem. The fact that these
potato diseases exist at all implies that some failure in soil
management has occurred. The obvious method of dealing
with a collapse of this kind should have been to ascertain the
causes of failure rather than: to tinker with the consequences of
some mistake in management. The net result has been that all
this work on the periphery of the subject has not solved the
problem of how to grow a healthy potato. Thisis because direction
has been completely lost.

The same story is repeated in manuring: fragmentation has
again been followed by loss of direction. Notwithstanding the
fact that in the forest Nature has provided examples to copy and
in the peat-bog examples to avoid, when devising any rational
system of manuring, agricultural science at once proceeded to
fragment the subject. For nearly a hundred years some of the
ablest workers have devoted themselves to a study of soil nutrients,
including trace elements like boron, iron, and cobalt. Green-
manuring is a separate subject, so is the preparation of artificial
farm-yard manure and the study of the ordinary manure heap.
The weight of produce and the cost of manuring overshadow
questions of quality. The two subjects which really matter in
manuring—the preservation of soil fertility and the quality of the
produce—escape attention altogether, mainly because direction
has been so largely lost.

The insistence on quantitative results is another of the weak-
nesses in scientific investigation. It has profoundly influenced
agricultural rescarch. In chemistry and physics, for example,
accurate records are everything: these subjects lend themselves
to exact determinations which can be recorded numerically. But
the growing of crops and the raising of live stock belong to biology,
a domain where everything is alive and which is poles asunder
from chemistry and physics. Many of the things that matter on ‘
the larid, such as soil fertility, tilth, soil management, the quality
of produce, the bloom and health of animals, the general manage-
ment of live stock, the working relations between master and man, —
the esprit de corps of the farm as a whole, cannot be weighed or
measured. Nevertheless their presence is everything: their absence

[PAG 224]
A ORITICISM OF PRESENT-DAY AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 197

spells failure. Why, therefore, in a subject like this should there be
so much insistence on weights and measures and on the statistical
interpretation of figures? Are not the means (quantitative results
and statistical methods) and the subject investigated (the growth
of a crop or the raising of live stock) entirely out of relation the
one to the other? Can the operations of agriculture ever be
carried out, even on an experiment station, so that the investigator
is sure -that everythirig possible has been done for the crop and
for the animal? Cana mutually interacting system, like the crop
and the soil, for example, dependent on a multitude of factors which
are changing from week to week and year to year, ever be made
to yield quantitative results which correspond with the precision ~
of mathematics?

The invasion of economics into agricultural research naturally
followed the use of quantitative methods. It was an imitation of
the successful application of costings to the operations of the factory
and the general store. In a factory making nails, for example, it
is possible, indeed eminently desirable, to compare the cost of the
raw material and the operations of manufacture, including labour,
fuel, overhead expenses, wear and tear and so forth, with the

‘ output, and to ascertain how and where savings in cost and general
speeding up can be achieved. Raw materials, output, and stocks
can all be accurately determined. In a verv short time a manu-
facturer with brains and energy will know the cost of every step
«in the process to the fourth place of decimals. This is because
everything is computable. In a similar manner the operations
of the general store can be reduced to figures and squared paper.
The men in the counting-house can follow the least falling-off in
efficiency and in the winning of profit. How very natural it was
some thirty years ago to apply these principles to Mother carth
and to the farmer! The result has been.a deluge of costings and
of agricultural economics largely based on guess-work, because

‘ the machinery of the soil will always remain a closed book.
Mother earth does not keep a pass-book. Almost every operation
in agriculture adds or subtracts an unknown quantity to or from
the capital of the soil—fertility—another unknown quantity. Any
experimental result such as a crop is almost certain to be partly
due to the.transfer of some of the soil’s capital to the profit and

[PAG 225]
.

198 AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH
loss account of the farmer. The economics of such operations
must therefore be based on the purest of guess-work. The results
can hardly be worth the paper they are written on. The only
things that matter on a farm are these: the credit of the farmer—
that is to say what other people, including his labour force and
his bank manager, think of him; the total annual expenditure;
the total annual income and the annual valuation—the condition
of the land and of the live and dead stock at the end of the year.
If all these things are satisfactory nothing else matters. If they
are not, no amount of costings will avail. Why, therefore, trouble
about anything beyond these essentials? .

But economics has done a much greater disservice to agriculture _
than the collection of useless data. Farming has come to be looked

‘ at as if it were a factory., Agriculture is regarded as a com-

mercial enterprise; far too much emphasis has been laid on profit.”
But the purpose of agriculture is quite different from that of a
factory. It has to provide food in order, that the race may flourish
and persist. The best results are obtained if the food is fresh and ~

.the soil is fertile. Quality is more important than weight of
produce. Farming is therefore a vital matter for the population
and ranks with the supply of drinking water, fresh air, and pro-
tection from the weather. Our water supplies do not always pay
their way; .the provision of green belts and open spaces does not
yield a profit; our housing schemes are frequently uneconomic.
Why, then, should the quality of the food on which still more
depends than water, oxygen, or warmth be looked at in a different
way? The people must be fed whatever happens. Why not, then,
make a supreme effort to see that they are properly fed? Why
neglect the very foundation-stone of our efficiency as a nation?
‘The nation’s food in the nature of things must always take the
first place. The financial system, after all, is but a secondary
matter. Economics therefore, in failing to insist on these elemen-
tary truths, has been guilty of a grave error of judgement.

In allowing science to be used to wring the last ounce from the
soil by new varieties of crops, cheaper and more stimulating
manures, deeper and more thorough cultivating machines, hens
which lay themselves to death, and cows which perish in an ocean

. of milk, something more than a want of judgement on the part

[PAG 226]
A CRITICISM OF PRESENT-DAY AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 199

of the organization is involved. Agricultural research has been
misused to make the farmer, nota better producer of food, but a
more expert bandit., He has been taught how to profiteer at the
expense of posterity—how to transfer capital in the shape of soil
fertility and the reserves of his live stock to his profit and loss
account. In business such practices end in bankruptcy; in agri-
cultural resgarch they lead to temporary success. All goes well as
long as the soil can be made to yield a crop. But soil fertility does
not last for ever; eventually the land is worn out; real farming
dies. . .

In the following chapter an example of the type of research
needed in the future wili be described.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Carre, ALexs. Man, the Unknown, London, 1939.

Constitution and Functions of the Agricultural Research Council, H.M. Stationery Office,
London, 1938.

Dasrrr, Str Wirriax C. ‘Agricultural Research and the Work of the Agricultural
Research Council’, Journal of the Farmers’ Club, 1938, p. 55.

Evans, Str GEOrFrey. ‘Research and Training in Tropical Agriculture’. Journal of
the Royal Society of Arts, lxxxvii, 1939, p. 332.

Lrsic, J. Chemistry in its Applications to Agriculture and Physiology, London, 1840.

Report of the Imperial Agricultural Research Conference, H.M. Stationery Office, London,
1927.

Report on Agricultural Research in Great Britain PEP, 16 Queen Anne's Gate, London,

1938.

[PAG 227]
CHAPTER XIV

A SUCCESSFUL EXAMPLE OF AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH

L the last chapter the agricultural research of to-day was severely
criticized ; its many shortcomings weré frankly setout; suggestions
were made for its gradual amendment. That these strictures are
justified will be evident if we examine in detail a piece of successful
research carried out on the sugar-cane crop in India during a
period of nearly twenty-seven years: 1908-35.

In 3910 the investigations on sugar-cane in Northern India
were mainly concentrated in the United Provinces, where'a con-
siderable local industry was already in existence. Narrow-leaved,
thin canes were planted under irrigation at the beginning of the
hot season in March; the crop was crushed by bullock power
during the cold weather (January to March); the juice was con-
verted into crude sugar in open pans. The yield was low, a little
over one ton to the acre on the average. It was decided to develop
this primitive industry and the work, at first purely chemical, was
placed in the hands of Mr. George Clarke, the Agricultural
Chemist. The choice proved to be a happy one. Clarke combined
a first-class knowledge of chemistry and general science with con-
siderable experience of research methods, obtained under Pro-
fessors Kipping and Pope at Nottingham University College and
the School of Technology, Manchester. The son of a south
Lincolnshire farmer, he had all his life been familiar with good
agricultural practice and'had inherited a marked aptitude for
farming from a long line of yeomen ancestors. He had therefore

‘acquired the three preliminary qualifications essential for an
investigator in agriculture, namely, the makings of a good farmer,
a sound training in science, and a first-hand acquaintance with
methods of research. It will be seen from what follows that he
also possessed the gift of correct diagnosis, the capacity to pose to
himself the problems to be investigated, the persistence to solve
them, and the drive needed to get the results taken up by the people
and firmly welded irito the practice of the country-side. 5

Glarke was most fortunate i in the choice of his staff. He had

[PAG 228]
A SUCCESSFUL EXAMPLE OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 201

associated with him throughout two Indian officers—S. C. Banerji
(afterwards Rai Bahadur) and Sheikh Mahomed Naib Husain
(afterwards Khan Bahadur). Banerji, who possessed the dignity
and repose of his race, was in charge of the laboratories—always
a model of order and efficiency—and was accurate and painstak-
ing almost beyond belief.. Naib Husain was of a very different
temperament—hot-tempered and full of the energy and drive
needed to break new ground in crop production. His absorbing
interest in life was the Shahjahanpur farm and the condition of
his crops and he never spared himself to make all he undertook a
success. Both these men gave their lives to their work and both
* lived to see their efforts crowned with success, and the Shah-
‘jahanpur farm the centre of perhaps the most remarkable example
of rural development so far achieved. No European officer in
India has ever had more Joyal assistants; Indian agriculture has
never been served with more devotion. I saw much of their work
and watched the growth of the modest but efficient organization
they helped to build. It is a great regret to me that they are not
. here to read this genuine tribute of admiration and respect from a
-fellow worker of another race.

It had been the custom till rgr2 in the United Provinces to keep
their scientific officers isolated from the practical side of agri-
cultural improvement, and there were no clear ideas how the
combined scientific and practical problems connected with cane
cultivation should be tackled.’ It did not strike any one that it
would be necessary for the scientific investigator to grow the crop
and master the local agriculture before any improvement could
be devised and tried. When therefore in 1911 Clarke asked to be
provided with a farm, there was a good deal of discussion and some
amazement. The -matter was referred to the All-India Board of
Agriculture in 1911, where the proposal was severely criticized.
The agricultural members did not like the idea of scientific men
having land of their own; the representatives of science con-
sidered they would lose caste if another of their number took up
farming. °

In 1912 I happened to be on tour in the United Provinces when
the matter came up for final decision. The Director of Agri-
culture asked my advice. I strongly supported Clarke’s proposal

[PAG 229]
202 AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH

and assured the authorities that great things would result if they
gave their agricultural chemist the best farm they could, and then
left him alone to work out his own salvation. This carried the day;
a special sugar-cane farm was established in 1912 near Shah-
jahanpur on the bank of the Kanout river and on one of the main
roads leading into the town. From 1912 to 1931, an unbroken’
period of nineteen years, Clarke remained in charge of Shah-
jahanpur in addition to the three posts he held: Agricultural
Chemist (1907-21), Principal of the Agricultural College (1919-
21), and Director of Agriculture (1921-31). From 1912 to 1921
he was there nearly every week-end. Until he became Director of
Agriculture in’ 1921, he was at Shahjahanpur every year from
Christmas until March for the sugar-cane harvest and the planting
of the next year’s crop. It was during these periods that he gained
a first-hand knowledge of the Indian village, its people, its fields,
and its agricultural problems, which was to stand him ‘in such
good stead when he was called upon to direct the agricultural
development of the Provinces in the early years of the Montagu-
Chelmsford Reforms.
The sugar-growing tract of northern India, the most important
in the country, is a broad strip of deep alluvial land about 500 -
. miles in length skirting the Himalayas. It begins in Bihar; it ends
in the Punjab, and reaches its greatest development in the
Revenue Divisions of Gorakhpur, Meerut, and Rohilkhand of the
United Provinces. The soil is easily cultivated and is particularly
suitable for the root development of the sugar-cane. The climate,
however, is not particularly favourable as the growing period is
so short and confined to the rainy season—the last half of June,
July, August, and September—when the moist tropical conditions
created by the south-west monsoon are established. The rains are
followed by the cold season (October 15th to March 15th) during
which very little rain is received. After the middle of March
the weather: again changes, becoming very hot and dry till the
break of the rains in June. During the hot weather the cane,
which is usually planted towards the ‘end of F ebruary, has to be |
irrigated.
When work was started in ‘1912, the yield of stripped cane on
95 per cent. of the sugar-cane area of the United Provinces was

[PAG 230]
A SUCCESSFUL EXAMPLE OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 203

--only 1g tons to the acre, producing just over 1 ton of crude sugar
(gur). The land was fallowed during the previous rains and was
well prepared for the crop by 15 to 20 shallow ploughings with the
native plough. As in many:other Indian crops a good balance
hias been established, as a result of age-long experience, between
the methods of cultivation and the economic capacity of the
indigenous varieties. The methods of cultivation, the nitrogen
supply, and the kinds grown were all in correct relation the one

- to the other. These varietics had been cultivated for at least
twenty centuries and were thin, short, and very fibrous with juice
rich in sugar in good seasons. They remind one more of the wild
species of the genus Saccharum than of the thick sugar-canes found
in tropical countries. Five or six varieties are grown together,
each with a name, usually of Sanskrit origin, denoting thcir
qualities, and each is readily recognized by the people.

The types of cane grown by the cultivators in the Rohilkhand
Division were first separated and an attempt was made to intensify
the cultivation of the best. - The yield of cane was raised from 13 to
16 tons per acre without deterioration in the quality of the juice,
but further intensification did not succeed. As much as 27 tons
to the acre was obtained, but the thin, watery juice contained so
little sugar that it was not worth extracting. The variety and the
improved soil conditions were not in correct relation. The leaf
area developed by the indigenous varicties was insufficient, in
the short growing period of North India, to manufacture the
cellulose required for the fibre and other tissue of so large a crop,
and enough sugar to' make the juice of economic value. This was
a most important experiment as it defined the gencral problem
and showed definitely what had to be done. To raise the out-turn
of sugar in the United Provinces, a combination of intensive
methods of cultivation with more efficient varicties, adapted to
the very special climatic conditions, would be necessary. These
two problems were taken up simultaneously: in all the subsequent
work the greatest care was taken to avoid the fragmentation of the
factors, a rock on which so much of the agricultural research of
the present day founders.

Attention was then paid to the two chief factors underlying the
problem: (1) the discovery of a suitable cane, and (2) the study of

*

[PAG 231]
204 AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH

intensive cane growing with the object of finding out the maximum *
yield that could be obtained.

The collection of cane varieties at Shahjahanpur included a
Java seedling—POJ 213—which was exactly suited to the local
soil and climate and which responded to intensive cultivation.
This Java cane was a hybrid. Its pollen parent was the Rohilk-
hand variety Chunni, which had heen given to the Dutch experts,
who visited India twenty years earlier, by the Rosa Sugar Factory.
Chunni was immune to sereh—a serious disease then threatening -
the sugar industry in Java—and, when crossed with rich tropical
canes, produced immune or very resistant seedlings of good quality,
widely known throughout the world as POJ (Passoerean Ost-Java)
seedlings. POJ 213 proved invaluable during the early stages of
the Shahjahanpur work. It was readily accepted by the culti-
vators among whom it was known as ‘Java’. A large area was soon
grown in Rohilkhand and it saved the local sugar industry then
on the verge of extinction. Most important of all it created an
interest in new kinds of sugar-cane and prepared the ground for
the great advance, which came a few years later when a Coim-
batore seedling—Co 213—raised by the late Dr. Barber, CILE
replacedit. —~

Clarke had not been long in the United Provinces before he
noticed that the soil of the Gangetic plain could be handled in
much the same way as that of the Holland Division of Lincoln-
shire, where the intensive cultivation of potatoes had been intro-
duced sixty or seventy years before and brought to a high state of
perfection. Both soils are alluvial though’ of widely different date.
The problems connected with the intensive cultivation of potatoes
in Lincolnshire and sugar-cane in the United Provinces have a
great deal in common. Both crops are propagated vegetatively,
and in both it is a most important point to produce the soil condi-
tions necessary to develop the young plant quickly, so that it is
ready to manufacture and store a large quantity of carbohydrate
in a short period of favourable climatic conditions. - When the
intensification of sugar-cane cultivation was begun at Shah-
jahanpur, the lessons learnt in the potato. fields of Lincolnshire
were at once applied. During the fallow which preceded the crop,
the land was cultivated and, as soon as possible after the retreat

4

[PAG 232]
A SUCCESSFUL EXAMPLE OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 205

of the monsoon, the farm-yard manure was put on and ploughed
in. This gave the time necessary for a valuable supply of humus to
be formed in the top layer of the soil. The sugar-cane was planted
in shallow trenches 2 feet wide, 4 feet from centre to centre. The
soil from each trench was removed to a depth of 6 inches and piled
on the 2 feet space left between cach two trenches, the whole
making a series of ridges as illustrated in Fig. 6.

As soon as the trenches are made in November, they are dug
-with a local tool (kasi) to a further depth of g inches, and the

Fic. 6. Trench system at Shahjahanpur

oilcake, or whatever concentrated organic manure is available,
is thoroughly mixed with the soil of the floor of the trenches and
allowed to remain, with occasional digging, till planting time in
February. The thorough cultivation and manuring of the trenches
at least two months, and preferably three, before the canes are
planted, proved to be essential if the best results were to be
obtained. Readers familiar with the methods of sugar-cane culti-
vation in Java will at once realize that this Shahjahanpur method
is a definite advance on that in use in Java, in that the.use of
artificials is entirely unnecessary. Hand-made trenches always
give better yields than those made by mechanical means—an
interesting result, which has often been obtained elsewhere, but
which has never been adequately explained. It may be that speed
in cultivation is an adverse factor in the production of tilth.

At first heavy dressings of organic manures like castor cake
meal at the rate of about 2,870 Ib. to the acre were used in the
trenches. This contains about 4°5 per cent. of nitrogen, so that
2,870 Ib. is equivalent to 130 Ib. of nitrogen to the acre. This
heavy manuring, however, was soon reduced after the introduction
of the method of green-manuring described below. When green-
manuring was properly carried out, the dung applied before
making the trenches could be reduced to half or even less.

[PAG 233]
206 AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH ~

At first the trenches were irrigated about a month before
planting and lightly cultivated when dry ‘enough. These opera-
tions promoted the decay of the manure, and allowed for abundant
soil aeration. The canes were planted in the freshly dug moist
rich earth towards the end of February. Later this preliminary
watering was dispensed with. The cuttings were planted in the
dry earth, and lightly watered the next day. This saved one

irrigation and proved to be an effective protection from white
ants (Termites), which often attacked the cane cuttings unless
these started growth at once and the young plants quickly estab-
lished themselves. Four light waterings, followed in every case by
surface cultivation, were necessary before the break of the monsoon
in June. As soon as the young canes were about 2 feet high, and
were tillering vigorously, the trenches were gradually filled in,
beginning about the middle of May and completing the operation
by the end of the month. Before the rains began, the earthing up
of the canes commenced. It was completed by about the middle
of July (Fig 7). =.

One of the consequences of earthing up canes, grown in fertile
soil, observed by Clarke was the copious development of fungi
which were plainly visible as threads of white mycelium all

_ through the soil of the ridges, and particularly round the active
roots. As the sugar-cane is a mycorrhiza-former there is little
doubt that the mycelium, observed in such quantities, was con-
nected with.the mycorrhizal association. The provision of all the |
factors needed for this association—humus, aeration, moisture,
and a constant supply of active roots—probably explains why such

[PAG 234]
A SUCCESSFUL EXAMPLE OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 207

good results have always followed this method of growing the cane
and why the crops are so healthy. When grown on the flat, want
of soil aeration would always be a limiting factor in the full
establishment of the mycorrhiza.

The operation of earthing up serves four purposes: (1) the
succession of new roots, arising from the lower nodes, thoroughly
combs the highly aerated and fertile soil of the ridges; (2) the
conditions suitable for the development of the mycorrhizal associa-
tion are provided; (3) the standing power of the canes during the
rains is vastly improved; and (4) the excessive development of
colloids in the surface soil is prevented. If this earthing up is
omitted, a heavy crop of cane is almost always Jevellcd by the
monsoon gales; crops which fall down during the rains never
give the much-prized light coloured crude sugar. The production
of colloids in the surface soil, when the canes are grown on the
flat, always interferes with soil aeration during the period when
sugar is being formed; crops which ripen under conditions of
poor soil aeration-never give the maximum yield.

.An essential factor in obtaining the highest efficiency in this
ridging system is good surface drainage. This was achieved by
lowering the earth roads and paths which, when grassed over,
acted as very efficient drains for carrying off the excess rainfall
during the monsoon. The surface water collected in the trenches
which were suitably connected with the system of lowered paths
and roads. By this means the drainage crept away, in thin sheets
of clear water, to the river without any loss of organic matter or
of fine soil particles. The grass carpet acted as a most efficient
filter and was at the same time manured. The roads yielded good
crops of grass for the work cattle. This simple device should be
utilized wherever possible to prevent both water-logging and soil
erosion.

The results of this intensive method of canc cultivation—based
on the growth of efficient varieties, proper soil acration, good
surface drainage, carefully controlled irrigation, and an adequate
“supply of organic matter—were astounding. In place of 13 tons
of cane and just over a ton of sugar per acre, a yield of just over or
just under 36 tons of cane and 34 tons of sugar per acre was
obtained fora period of twenty years—ycarin and year out. These

[PAG 235]
208 AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH

are ‘the figures for the farm as a whole. The yield of sugar had
been trebled. Such a result has rarely been obtained for any
crop in so short a time and by such simple means. In a few cases
yields as high as 44 tons of cane and 4} tons of sugar were obtained,
figures which probably represent the highest possible production
in the climate ofthe United Provinces.

‘In working out this method of cane growing in northern India, -
two critical periods in sugar production were observed: (1) May
and early June when the tillers and root system are developing,
and (2) August and September when the main storage of sugar
takes place. A check received at either of these, periods per-
manently reduces the yield. The acre yield of sugar is positively
and closely correlated with the amount of nitrate nitrogen in the
soil during the first period and with soil moisture, soil aeration, and
atmospheric humidity in the second period. Any improvement in
cane growing must therefore take into account these two principles,

A new method of intensive cane cultivation had been devised
and put into successful practice on a field scale at a State Experi-
ment Station; the first step in improving sugar production had
been taken. It was now necessary to fit this advance into a system
of agriculture made up.of a multitude of small holdings, varying |
from an average of 4 acres in the eastern districts to 8 acres in
the western half of the province. Each holding is not only minute
but it is divided into tiny fields, scattered over the village area, .
which is by no means uniform in fertility. Moreover, the farmers
of these small holdings possess practically no capital for invest-
ment in intensive agricultute. How could the average cultivator
obtain the necessary manure? “The solution of this problem
entailed a detailed study of the nitrogen cycle on the Gangetic
alluvium, the relation between climate, methods of cultivation, |
and the accumulation of soil nitrate as well as the discovery of
what amounts to a new method of green-manuring for sugar-cane.
These investigations were set in motion the moment the possi-
bilities of intensive cane growing became apparent. x

The study of the nitrogen cycle, in any locality, naturally
includes «an intimate acquaintance with the local agriculture.
The outstanding feature of the agricultural year in the United
Provinces is the rapidity with which the seasons change, and the

[PAG 236]
PLATE VII

Rainfall inches(weekly total), Air temperature(fortnightly means)

Mitre Mircgen perts per mullon dry Soul,

NITRATE ACCUMULATION IN THE GANGETIC ALLUVIUM

[PAG 238]
A SUCCESSFUL EXAMPLE OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 209

wide variation in their character. The most important of these
abrupt transitions are: (1) the change from the excessive dryness
and high temperatures of April, May, and early June to the moist
tropical conditions which set in when the summer crops are
sown at the end of June, immediately after the break of the south-
west monsoon, and (2) the sudden transition from high humidity,
high temperature, and a saturated condition of the soil, at the
end of the monsoon in September, to the dry temperate conditions
which obtain when the autumn sowings of food crops take place
in October. These sudden seasonal changes impose definite limits
on what can be done to increase production. There is very little
time for the preparation of the land, or for the manufacture of
plant food by biological agencies; the period of active growth
of the crop is severely limited. The former influences the methods
of cultivation and manuring; the latter the selection of varietics.
The wide difference between the two agricultural seasons in the
United Provinces is best realized in the autumn (November and
December), when crops of ripening cane and growing wheat are to
be seen side by side in adjacent fields.