=== An Agricultural Testament - Albert Howard.pdf — CHUNK 8/14 ===
Chars: 44,556 | Offset: 312,376



[PAG 157]
132 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

of nitrate of soda. In the guava, however, combined nitrogen
removes the harmful effect because the roots of this tree are able
to obtain all the oxygen they need. The guava, therefore, suffers
from only one of the factors resulting from a grass carpet--lack of
20 Grassed down

Grarsed down but partially
aerated by trenches
Surface cultivated © .....,..

ee

È

Pencent CO, sy vatune”
+
ò o,

d

Jan. Fee. Marcin Artur May June Ju AUG. Srp. Get. - How Dro.
Fic. 5. Carbon dioxide in soil atmosphere, Pusa, 1919.

nitrate. The litchi and the loquat suffer from another factor as _
well—lack of oxygen.

FOREST TREES AND GRASS

Although the grass carpet acts as an asphyxiating agent to
the roots of all the fruit-trees investigated except the guava, the
ordinary Indian forest trees thrive under grass. Between the years
1921 and 1923 the relation between the grass carpet and the roots
of the following fifteen forest trees was investigated (Table 10,
p. 133): All thrive remarkably well under grass and show none of
the harmful effects exhibited by fruit-trees.

Most of the forest trees in the plains of India flower and come
into new leaf in the hot season and then proceed to form new
shoots. After the early rains a distinct change is visible in the size,
colour, and appearance of the foliage. The leaves become darker

[PAG 158]
PLATE VI

GUAVA (Psidium Guyara, L.)

Fic. 1. Superficial and decp roots (November 23, 1921).

Fic. 2. The influence of soil texture on the formation of the rootlets (March 29,
1921).

Fio. 3. The root-system under crass (April 21, 1921).

Fro. 4. Superficial rootlet growing to the surface (August 28, 1921).

Fic. 5. Formation of new rootlets in fine sand following the fall of the ground-water
(November 20, 1921).

Fic. 6. Reduction in the size of leaves after 20 months under grass (right).

[PAG 160]
. SOIL AERATION - 133
and more glossy; the story told by the young shoots of the custard
apple (p. 122) is repeated. i

Examination of the superficial root systems of the fifteen species
during the rains of 1922 and 1923 yielded remarkably uniform
results. All the trees produced abundant, normally developed

TABLE 10
Forest trees under grass în the Botanical Area, Pusa

Species Time of flowering Time of leaf-fall
Polyalthia longifolia Benth. & Hook, f. . | February-April April
Melia Azadirachta L. . . . | March-May March,
Ficus bengalensis L. . . . . | April-May March
Ficus religiosa L. . . .° + | April-May December
Ficus infectoria Roxb. . . . | February-May December-January
Millingtonia hortensis Linn.,f. . . | November-Decem- | March

ber
Butea frondosa Roxb. . . + | March February
Phyllanthus Emblica L. . . . | March-May February
Tamarindus indica L. . . . | AprilJune March-April
Tectonia grandis Linn., f. . . » | July-August February-March
Thespesia populnea Corr. . . . | Throughout the | April
year but chiefly

. in the cold season
Plerospermum acerifolium Willd. . +. | March-June January-February
Wrightia tomentosa Roem. & Schult. i April-May January-February
Lagerstroemia Flos-Regina Retz. . May December-January
Dalbergia Sissoo Roxb. . . . i March December-January

active rootlets in the upper 2 or 3 inches of soil and also on the
surface; they therefore compete successfully with grass both for
oxygen and nitrates. The large superficial roots were also well
developed and compared favourably with the corresponding root
system of fruit-trees under clean cultivation. The grass carpet had
apparently no harmful effect on the root system near the surface.

Between the hot weather of 1921 and the carly months of 1924
the complete root systems of these fifteen species were investigated.
In all cases the large surface roots gave off thin branches which
grew vertically downwards to the cold-season level of the ground
water. Root activity in all cases was practically confined in the
hot season to the deep moist layers of sand between 10 and 20 feet
below the surface, the roots always making the fullest use of the
tunnels of Termites and other burrowing insects for passing easily
through clay layers from one zone of sandy soil to the next below.

[PAG 161]
194. HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

Cavities in the soil were always fully used for root development. °
Soon after the rains the dormant surface roots burst into activity.
As the ground water rose the deep root system became dormant;
in August the active surface roots always showed marked aero-
tropism. The formation of*nitrates which takes place about the
time the cold-season crops are sown was followed by a definite
burst of renewed root activity in the surface soil, followed by the
production of new shoots and leaves. As the grourid water falls in
the autumn and the soil draws in oxygen, the formation of active
roots follows the descending water-table exactly as has been de-
scribed in the case of the guava..

The facts of root distribution and periodicity in root activity in
forest trees explain why these trees do so well under grass and are
able to vanquish it if allowed free competition. The chief weapons
which enable forest trees to oust grasses and herbs from the habitat
are the following: -

1. The deep root system admits of growth during the dry season
when the grass is dormant, thereby enabling the trees to
utilize moisture and food materials in the soil down to at
least 20 feet. This markedly extends the period of assimila-
tion.

2. The habit of trees is a great advantage i in the struggle for
light.

3. The active roots of the surface system are resistant to poor .
soil aeration, and are able to reach the surface and compete
successfully with the grass for oxygen and for minerals..

The characcer which distinguishes forest trees from fruit-trees is
the power possessed.by the surface roots of the former to avoid the
consequences of poor soil aeration by forcing their way through
a grass carpet in active growth to the air and to obtain oxygen as
well as a share of the nitrates in the surface soil. The surface roots
of most fruit-trees are very susceptible to carbon dioxide and try
to avoid it by growing. downwards. The trees are therefore de-
prived ‘of oxygen and of combined nitrogen during the rains, and
slowly starve. The guava is an exception among fruit-trees. Here
the active roots reach the surface in the rains and the trees are able
to maintain themselves. ‘This explains why the pastures of Grenada

[PAG 162]
SOIL AERATION 135

and St. Vincent in the West Indies are so rapidly invaded and
destroyed by the wild guava. The hedgerows and pastures of
Great Britain if left to themselves behave in a similar way. The
hedgerows soon begin to invade the fields. Young trees make
their appearance; grass areas become woodland. The trans-
formation, however, is much slower in Great Britain than in the
tropics, °

These studies on the root development of tropical forest trees
throw-a good deal of light on the soil aeration factor and the part
the plant can play in such investigations. The movement of the

‘ ground water affects soil aeration directly. The two periods—the
beginning and end of the rainy season—when the surface soil
contains abundant air and ample moisture and when the tempera-
ture is favourable for nitrification, correspond exactly with times
when nitrates accumulate (p. 209) and when growth is at its
maximum. When soil aeration is interfered with during the rains
by two factors, (1) the rise of the ground water, and (2) the forma-
tion of colloids in the surface soil, the plant roots respond by grow- -
ing to the surface. Root development, therefore, is an: important
instrument in such an investigation when examined throughout
the year. |

The root development of trees influences the maintenance of soil
fertility in the plains of India and indeed in many other regions.
The dead roots provide the deeper layers of soil with organic
matter and an almost perfect drainage and aerating system. The
living roots comb the upper 20 feet of soil for such minerals as
phosphates and potash which arc used in the green leaves. These
leaves in due course are converted into humus and help to enrich
the surface soil. This explains why the soils of North Bihar,
although very low in total and available phosphates, arc so exceed-
ingly fertile and yield heavy crops without any addition of mineral
manures. The figures given by the analysis of the surface soil must
be repeated in the lower layers and should be interpreted not in
terms of the upper g inches but of the upper 20 feet.

The tree is the most efficient agent available-for making usc of
the minerals in the soil. It can grow almost anywhere, it will
vanquish most of the other forms of vegetation, and it will leave the
soil in a highly fertile condition. It follows therefore that the trees

[PAG 163]
136 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

and shrubs of the hedgerows, parks, and woodlands of countries
like Great Britain must continue to be used for the maintenance
of soil fertility. In Saxon times most of our best land was under
forest. The fertility stored in the soil made the gradual clearing
of this woodland worth while. In the future, when agriculture
comes into its own and when it is no longer regarded solely as an
industry, it may be desirable to embark on long term rotations in
which woods and park-land are turned into arable, and worn-out
arable back into woodland or into mixed grass and trees. In this
way the root system of the tree can be used to restore soil fertility. _

THE AERATION OF THE SUB-SOIL

One of the universal methods of improving aeration is sub-
soiling. The methods adopted vary greatly according to the factor
which has interfered with aèration and the means available for
improving the air-supply.

In temperate regions the chief factor which cuts off the sub-soil
from the atmosphere is shortage of humus aggravated by imper-
meable pans (produced by the plough and by the soil particles
themselves) or a permanent grass carpet accompanied by the
constant treading of animals. The result in all cases is the same—
the supply of air to the sub-soil is reduced.

In Joamy soils plough-pans develop very rapidly if the content
of organic matter falls off and the earthworm population declines.
A well-defined zone of close and sticky soil is formed just under
the plough sole which holds up water, thereby partly asphyxiating
the sub-soil below and water-logging the soil above.

In sandy soils as well as in silts, pans are formed with the greatest
ease from the running together of the particles, particularly when
artificials take the place of farm-yard, manure and the temporary
ley is not properly utilized. One of the most interesting cases of
pan formation that I have observed in Great Britain was on the
permanent manurial plots of the Woburn Experiment Station,
where an attempt to grow cereals year after year on the greensand
by means of artificial manures has been followed by complete
failure of the crop. The soil has gone on permanent strike. The
destruction of the earthworm population by the regular applica-
tion of chemicals had deprived the land of its natural aerating

[PAG 164]
SOIL AERATION 137

agencies. Failure to renew the organic matter by a suitable rota-
tion had resulted in a soil devoid of even a trace of tilth. About
g inches below the surface, a definite pan (made up of sand
particles loosely cemented together) occurred, which had so altered
the aeration of the sub-soil that the whole of these experimental
plots were covered with a dense growth of mares’ tail (Eguisetum
arvense L.), a perennial weed which always indicates a badly
aerated sub-soil. Nature as usual had summed up the position in
her own inimitable fashion. ‘There was no need of tabulated
yields, analyses, curves, and statistics to explain the consequences
of improper methods of agriculture.

The conventional method of dealing with arable pans in this
country is by means of some sub-soiling implement which breaks
them up and restores aeration. This should be accompanicd
whenever possible by heavy dressings of farm-yard manure, so
that the tilth can be improved and the earthworm population
restored. Some deep-rooted crop like lucerne, or even a temporary
ley, should be called in to complete the cure. Sub-soiling heavy
land under grass is proving even more advantageous than on
arable areas. This leads, as we have seen (p. 102), to humus
formation under the turf and to an increase in the stock-carrying
capacity of the land.

In the East the ventilation of the sub-soil is perhaps even more
important than in the West. In India, for cxample, one of the
common consequences of the monsoon rainfall and of flooding the
surface with irrigation water is pan formation on a colossal scale
due to the formation of soil colloids—the whole of the surface soil
tends to become a pan. This has to be broken up. The cultivators
of the Orient set about this task in a very interesting way. When-
ever they can use the roots of a leguminous crop as a sub-soiler
they invariably employ this machine. It has the merit of costing
nothing, of yielding essential food and fodder, and of suiting the
small field. In the Indo-Gangctic plain the universal sub-soiler is
the pigeon pea, the roots of which not only break up soil pans
with case but also add organic matter at the same time. On the
Western frontier the sub-soiling of the dense loess soils is always
done by the roots of a lucerne crop. On the black cotton soils of
Peninsular India where the monsoon rainfall converts the whole

[PAG 165]
138 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

of the surface soil into.a vast colloidal pan, the agricultural situa-
tion is saved by the succeeding hot season which dries out this pan
and reduces its volume to such an extent that a multitude of deep
fissures occur right down to the sub-soil. The black soils of India
plough and sub-soil themselves. The moist winds, which precede
the south-west monsoon in May and early June, replace some of _
the lost moisture; the heavy clods break down and when the early

rains arrive a magnificent tilth can be prepared for the cotton .
crop. The sub-soiling in this case is done by Nature; the cultiva-

tors merely give a subsequent cultivation and then sow the crop.

- ‘* BIBLIOGRAPHY

Cements, F. E. Aeration and Air Content: the Role of Oxygen in Root Activity, Publicatior
No. 315, Carnegie Institution of Washington, 1921. -

Howarp, A. Crop Production in India: A Critical Survey of its Problems, Oxford University
Press, 1924.
—— ‘The Effect of Grass on Trees’, "Proc, Royal Soc., Series B, xcvii, 1925, p. 284.

Lyon, T. L., HemicKE, A. J., and Wirson, D. D. The Relation of Soil Moisture and
Nitrates to the Effects of Sod on Apple Trees, Memoir 63, Cornell Agricultural Expt.
Station, 1923.

Tue Duke or BEDFORD, and Pickerine, S. U. “Science and Fruit-Growing, London, 1919.

WEAVER, J. E., JEAN, F. C., and Crist, J. W. Development and Activities of Crop Plants,
Publication No. 316, Carnegie Institution of Washington, 1922.

[PAG 166]
CHAPTER X
SOME DISEASES OF THE SOIL

SOIL EROSION
prs the most widespread and the most important disease
of the soil at the present time is soil erosion, a phase of infertility
to which great attention is now being paid.

Soil erosion in the very mild form of denudation has been in
operation since the beginning of time. It is one of the normal
operations of Nature going on everywhere. The minute soil
particles which result from the decay of rocks find their way sooner
or later to the ocean, but many may linger on the way, often for
centuries, in the form of one of the constituents of fertile fields.
This phenomenon can be observed in any river valley. The fringes
of the catchment area are frequently uncultivated hills through
the thin soils of which the underlying rocks protrude. These are
constantly weathered and in the process yield a continuous supply
of minute fragments in all stages of decomposition.

The slow rotting of exposed rock surfaces is only one of the
forms of decay. The covering of soil is no protection to the under-
lying strata but rather the reverse, because the soil water, contain-
ing carbon dioxide in solution is constantly disintegrating the
parent rock, first producing sub-soil and then actual soil. At the
same time the remains of plants and animals are converted into
humus. The fine soil particles of mincral origin, often mixed with

* fragments of humus, are then gradually removed by rain, wind,
snow, or ice to lower regions. Ultimately the rich valley lands arc
reached where the accumulations may be many fect in thickness.
One of the main duties of the streams and rivers, which drain the
vallcy, is to transport these soil particles into the sea where fresh
land can be laid down. The process looked at as a whole is noth-
ing more than Nature’s method of the rotation, not of the crop,
but of the soil itself. When the time comes for the new land to be
enclosed and brought into cultivation agriculture is born again.
Such operations are well seen in England in Holbeach marsh and
similar areas round the Wash. From the time of the Romans to
the present day, new arcas of fertile soil, which now fetch £100 an

[PAG 167]
x . . '

140 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

acre or even more, have been re-created from the uplands by the
Welland, thé Nen, and the Ouse. All this fertile land, perhaps:
the most valuable in.England, is the result of two of the most
widespread processes in Nature—weathering and denudation.

It is when the tempo of denudation is vastly accelerated by
human agencies that a perfectly harmless natural process becomes
transformed into a definite disease of the soil. The condition
known as soil erosion—a man-made disease—is then established.
Itis, however, always preceded by infertility: the inefficient, overworked,
dying soil is at once removed by the operations of Nature and
hustled towards the ocean, so that new land can be created and the
rugged individualists—the bandits of agriculture—whose cursed
_ thirst for profit is at the root of the mischief can be given a second
chance. Nature is anxious to make a new and better start and
naturally has no patience with the inefficient. Perhaps when the
time’ comes for a new essay in farming, mankind will have learnt .
a great lesson—how to subordinate the profit motive to the sacred
duty of handing over unimpaired to the next generation the heri-
tage of a fertile soil. Soil erosion is nothing less than the outward
and visible sign of the complete failure of a policy. The causes of
this failure are to be found in ourselves. .

The damage already done by soil erosion all over the world
looked at in the mass is very great and is rapidly increasing. The
regional contributions to this destruction, however, vary widely.
In some areas like north-western Europe, where most of the agri-
cultural land is under a permanent or temporary cover crop (in,
the shape of grass or leys), and there is still a large area of wood-
land and.forest, soil erosion is a minor factor in agriculture. In-
other regions like parts of North America, Africa, Australia, and
the countries bordering the Mediterranean, where extensive de-
forestation has been practised and where almost uninterrupted -
cultivation has been the rule, large tracts of land once fertile have
been almost completely destroyed.

The United States of America is perhaps the only country
where anything in the nature of an accurate estimate of the damage
done by erosion has been made. Theodore Roosevelt first warned
the ‘country as to its national importance. Then came the Great
War with its ngh ‘prices, which encouraged the wasteful exploita-

[PAG 168]
SOME DISEASES OF THE SOIL ° 141

tion of soil fertility on an unprecedented scale. A period offinancial
depression, a series of droughts and dust-storms, emphasized the
urgency of the salvage of agriculture. During Franklin Roosevelt’s
Presidency, soil conservation has become a political and social
problem of the first importance. In 1937 the condition and needs
of the agricultural land of the U.S.A. were appraised. No less
than 253,000,000 acres, or 61 per cent. of the total arca under
crops, had either been completely or partly destroyed or had lost
most of its fertility. Only 161,000,000 acres, or 39 per cent. of the
cultivated area, could be safely farmed by present methods. In
less than a century the United States has therefore lost nearly
three-fifths of its agricultural capital. If the whole of the potential
resources of the country could be utilized and the best possible
practices introduced everywhere, about 447,466,000 acres could
be brought into use—an area somewhat greater than the present
crop land area of 415,334,931 acres. The position therefore is not
hopeless. It will, however, be very difficult, very expensive, and
very time-consuming to restore the vast areas of croded land even
if money is no object and large amounts of manure are used and
green-manure crops are ploughed under.

‘ The root of this soil erosion trouble in the United States is mis-
use of the land. The causes of this misuse include lack of individual
knowledge of soil fertility on the part of the pioncers and their
descendants; the traditional attitude which regarded the land as
‘source of profit; defects in farming systems, in tenancy, and
finance—most mortgages contain no provisions for the main-
tenance of fertility; instability of agricultural production (as
carricd out by millions of individuals), prices and income in con-
trast to industrial production carried on by a few large corporations.
The need for maintaining a correct relation between industrial
and agricultural production so that both can develop in full swing
on the basis of abundance has only recently been understood.
The country was so vast, its agricultural resources weresoimmense,
that the profit seckers could operate undisturbed until soil fertility
—the country’s capital—began to vanish at an alarming rate.
The present position, although disquicting, is not impossible.
The resources of the Government are being called up to put the
land in order. The magnitude of the effort, the mobilization of all

[PAG 169]
142 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE-IN AGRICULTURE

available knowledge, the practical steps that are being taken to
save what is left of the soil of the country and to help Nature to
repair the damage already done are graphically set out in Soils and
Men, the Year Book of the United States Department of Agricul-
ture of 1938. This is perhaps the best local account of soil erosion
which has yet appeared. . . ~
The rapid agricultural development of Africa’ was soon followed

by soil erosion. In South Africa, a pastoral country, some of the
best grazing areas are already semi-desert. The Orange Free
State in 1879 was covered with rich grass, interspersed with reedy
pools, where now only useless gullies are found. Towards the end
of the nineteenth century it began to be realized all over South
Africa that serious over-stocking was.taking place. In 1928 the
Drought Investigation Commission reported that soil erosion was

‘ extending rapidly over many parts of the Union, and that the
eroded material was silting up reservoirs and rivers and causing a
marked decrease in the underground water-supplies. The cause of
erosion was considered to be the reduction of vegetal cover brought
about by incorrect veld management—the concentration of stock
in kraals, over-stocking, and indiscriminate burning to obtain fresh .
autumn or winter grazing. In Basutoland, a normally well-watered -
country, soil erosion is now the most immediately pressing adminis- '
trative problem. The pressure of population has brought large
areas under the plough and has intensified over-stocking on the
remaining pasturé. In Kenya the soil erosion problem has become
serious during the last three years, both in the native reserves and
in the European areas. In the former, wealth depends on the
possession of large flocks and herds; barter is carried on in terms
of live stock; the bride price is almost universally paid in animals;

“ numbers rather than quality are the rule. The natural consequence
is over-stocking, over-grazing, and the destruction of the natural
covering of the. soil. Soil erosion ‘is the inevitable result. In the
European areas erosion is caused by long and continuous over-
cropping without the adoption of measures to prevent the loss of
soil and to maintain the humus content. Locusts have oflate been
responsible for greatly accelerated erosion; examples are to be
seen where the combined effect of locusts and. goats has resulted
in the loss of a foot of surface soil in a single rainy season. —

[PAG 170]
“ of

SOME DISEASES OF THE SOIL 143

The countries bordering the Mediterranean provide striking
examples of soil erosion, accompanied by the formation of deserts
which are considered to be due to one main cause—the slow and
continuous deforestation of the last 3,000 years. Originally well
wooded, no forests are to be found in the Mediterranean region
proper. Most of the original soil has been washed away by the
sudden winter torrents. In North Africa the fertile cornfields,
which existed in Roman times, are now desert. Ferrari in his
book on woods and pastures refers to the changes in the soil and
climate of Persia after’ its numerous and majestic parks were
destroyed; the soil was transformed into sand; the climate became
arid and suffocating; springs first decreased and then disappeared.
Similar changes took place in Egypt when the forests were
devastated; a decrease in rainfall and in soil fertility was accom-
panied by loss of uniformity in the climate. Palestine was once
covered with valuable forests and fertile pastures and possessed
a cool and moderate climate; to-day its mountains are denuded,
its rivers are almost dry, and crop production is reduced to a
minimum. |

The above examples indicate the wide extent of soil crosion,
the very serious damage that is being done, and the fundamental
cause of the trouble—misuse of. the land. In dealing with the
remedies which have been suggested and which are now bcing
tried out, it is essential to envisage the real nature of the problem.
It is nothing less than the repair of Nature’s drainage system—the
river-—and of Nature’s method of providing the country-side with
a regular water-supply. The catchment area of the river is the
natural unit in erosion control. In devising this control we must
restore the efficiency of the catchment area as a drain and also as
a natural storage of water. Once this is accomplished we shall
hear very little about soil erosion.

Japan provides perhaps the best example of the control of soil
crosion in a country with torrential rains, highly crodible soils,
and a topography which renders the retention of the soil on stecp
slopes very difficult. Here erosion has been effectively held in
check, by methods adopted regardless of cost, for the reason that
the alternative to their execution would be national disaster. The
great danger from soil crosion in Japan is the deposition of soil

[PAG 171]
144 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

debris from the steep mountain ‘slopes on the rice-fields below. - -
The texture of the rice soils must be maintained so that the fields
will hold water and allow of the minimum of through drainage.
If such areas became covered with a deep layer of permeable soil, _
brought down by crosion from the hill-sides, they would no longer
hold water, and rice cultivation—the mainstay of Japan’s food-
supply—would be out of the question. For this reason the country
has spent as much as ten times the capital value of eroding land .
on soil conservation work, mainly as an insurance for saving the
valuable rice lands below. Thus in 1925 the Tokyo Forestry
Board spent 453 yen.(£45) per acre ‘in anti-erosion measures on - ‘
a forest area, valued.at 40 yen per acre, in order to save rice-fields
lower down valued at 240 to 300 yen per acre.

The dangers from ‘erosion have been recognized in Japan for
centuries and an exémplary technique has been developed for
preventing them. It is now a definite part of national policy to
maintain the upper regions of each catchment area under forest,
as the most economical and effective method of controlling flood
waters and insuring the production of rice in the valleys. For
many years erosion control measures have formed an important
item in the national budget.

According to Lowdermilk, erosion control in Japan i is like a
game of chess. The forest engineer, after studying his eroding
valley, makes his first move, locating and building one or more
check dams. He waits to see what Nature’s response is. This
determines.the forest engineer’s next move, Which may be another
dam or two, an increase in the former dam, or the construction
_of side retaining walls. After another pause for observation, the
next move is made and so on until erosion is checkmated. The
' operation of natural forces, such as sedimentation and re-vegeta-
tion, are guided and used to the best advantage to keep down costs
and to obtain practical results. No more is attempted than Nature has
already done in the region. By 1929 nearly 2,000,000 hectares of pro-
tection forests were used in erosîori control. These forest areas
do more than control erosion. They help the soil to absorb and
maintain large volumes of rain-water and to release it slowly to the
rivers and springs. \ ”

China, on the other hand, presents a very striking example of

[PAG 172]
SOME DISEASES OF THE SOIL- 145

the evils which result from the inability of the administration to
deal with the whole of a great drainage unit. Ori the slopes of the
‘upper reaches of the Yelléw River extensive soil erosion is con-
stantly going on. Every year the river transports over 2,000
million tons of soil, sufficient to raise an area of 400 square miles
by 5 feet. This is provided by the easily erodible loess soils of the
upper reaches of the catchment area. The mud is deposited in
the river bed lower down so that the embankments which contain
the stream have constantly to be raised. Periodically the great
river wins in this unequal contest and destructive inundations
result. The labour expended on the embankments:is lost because
the nature of the erosion problem as a whole has not been grasped,
and the area drained by the Yellow River has.not been studied
and dealt ‘with as a single organism. The difficulty now is the
over-population of the upper reaches of the catchment area, which
prevents afforestation and laying down to grass.. Had the Chinese
maintained effective control of the upper reaches—the real cause
of the trouble—thè erosion problem in all probability would have
been solved long ago at a lesser cost in Jabour than that which has
been devoted to the embankment of the river. China, unfortu-
nately, docs not stand alone in this matter. A number of other
rivers, like the Mississippi, are suffering from overwork, followed
by periodical floods as the result of the growth of soil erosion in the
upper reaches.

Although the damage done by uncontrolled erosion all over the
world is very great, and the case for action needs no argument,
nevertheless there is one factor on the credit side which has beén’
overlooked in the recent literature. A considerable amount of new
soil is being constantly produced by natural weathering agencics
from the sub-soil and the parent rock. This when suitably con-
served will soon re-create large stretches of valuable land. One
of the best regions for the study of this question is the black cotton
soil of Central India, which overlics the basalt. Here, although
crosion is continuous, the soil does not often disappear altogether,
for the reason that as the upper layers are removed by rain, fresh

, soil is re-formed fium below. The large amount of carth so pro-
duced is well scen in the Gwalior State, where the late Ruler
employed an irrigation officer, lent by the Government of India,

L

[PAG 173]
.

146 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

to construct a number of embankments, each furnished with spill-
ways, across many of the valleys, which had suffered so badly by. -
uncontrolled rain-wash in the past that they appeared to have no.
soil at all, the scrub vegetation just managing to survive in the.
crevices of the bare rock. How great is the annual formation of
new soil, even in such unpromising circumstances, must be seen
to be believed. In a very few years, the construction of embank-
ments was followed by stretches of fertile land which soon carried
fine crops of wheat. A brief illustrated account of the work done
by the late Maharaja of Gwalior would be of great value at the
moment for introducing a much needed note of optimism in the
consideration of this soil erosion problem. Things are not*quite
so hopeless as they are often made to appear.

Why is the forest such an effective agent in the prevention of
soil erosion and in feeding the springs and rivers? The forest
does two things: (1) the trees and undergrowth break up the rain- -
fall into fine spray and the litter on the ground protects the soil
from erosion; (2) the residues of the trees and animal life met with
in all woodlands are converted into humus, which is then absorbed
by the soil underneath, increasing its porosity and water-holding
power. The soil “cover and the soil humus together prevent
erosion and at the same time store large volumes of water. These
factors—-soil protection, soil porosity, and water retention—con-
ferred by the living forest cover, provide the key to the solution
of the soil erosion problem. All other purely mechanical remedies
such as terracing and drainage are secondary matters, although of
course. important in their proper place. The soil must have as
much cover as possible; it must be well stocked with humus so that
it can drink in and retain the rainfall. It follows, therefore, that
in the absence of trees there must be a grass cover, some-cover-
crop, and ample provision for keeping up the supply of humus.
Each field so provided suffers little or no erosion. This confirms
the view of Williams (Timiriasev Academy, Moscow) who, before
erosion became important in the Soviet Union, advanced an
hypothesis that the decay of past civilizations was due to a decline.
in soil fertility, consequent on the destruction of the soil’s crumb .
structure when the increasing demands of civilization necessitated.
the wholesale ploughing up of grass-land. Williams: regarded

[PAG 174]
SOME DISEASES OF THE SOIL 147

grass as the basis of all agricultural land utilization and the soil’s
chief weapon against the plundering instincts of humanity. His
views are exerting a marked influence on soil conservation policy
in the U.S.S.R. and indeed apply" to many other countries.

Grass is a valuable factor in the correct design and construction
of surface drains. Whenever possible these should be wide, very
shallow, and completely grassed over. The run-off then drains
away as a thin sheet of clear water, leaving all the soil particles
behind. The grass is thereby automatically manured and yields
abundant fodder. This simple device was put into practice at the
Shahjahanpur Sugar Experiment Station in India. The earth
service roads and paths were excavated so that, the level was a
few inches below that of the cultivated area. They were then
grassed over, becoming very effective drains in the rainy season,
carrying off the excess rainfall as clear water without any loss
of soil. ;

If we regard erosion as the natural consequence of improper
methods of agriculture, and the catchment area of the river as the
natural unit for the application of soil conservation methods, the
various remedies available fall into their proper place. The upper
reaches of each river system must be afforested; cover crops in-
cluding grass and leys must be used to protect the arable surface
whenever possible; the humus content of the soil must beincreased
and the crumb structure restored so that each field can drink in its
own rainfall; over-stocking and over-grazing must be prevented;
simple mechanical methods for conserving the soil and regulating
the run-off, like terracing, contour cultivation and contour drains,
must be utilized. There is, of course, no single anti-erosion device
which can be universally adopted. The problem must, in the
nature of things, be a local one. Nevertheless, certain guiding
principles exist which apply everywhere. First and foremost is the
restoration and maintenance of soil fertility, so that each acre of the
catchment area can do its duty by absorbing its share of the rainfall.

THE FORMATION OF ALKALI LANDS
When the land is continuously deprived of oxygen the plant is
soon unable to make use of it: a condition of permanent infertility
results.

[PAG 175]
148 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

In many parts of the tropics and sub-tropics agriculture is inter-
fered with by accumulations of soluble salts composed of various
mixtures of the sulphate, chloride, and carbonate of sodium. Such
. areas are known as alkali lands. When the alkali phase is still
in the mild or incipient stage, crop production becomes difficult
and care has to be taken to prevent matters from getting worse.
When the condition is fully established, the soil dies; crop pro-
duction is then out of the question. Alkali lands are common in
Central Asia, India, Persia, Iraq, Egypt, North Africa, and the
United States.

At orie period it was supposed that alkali soils were the natural —
consequences of a light rainfall, insufficient to wash out of the
land the salts which always form in it by progressive weathering
of the rock powder of which all soils largely consist. Hence alkali
lands were considered to be a natural feature of arid tracts, such
as parts of north-west India, Iraq, and northern Africa, where
the rainfall is very small. Such ideas on the origin and occurrence
of alkali lands do not correspond with the facts and are quite
misleading. The rainfall of the Province of Oudh, in India, for
example, where large stretches of alkali lands naturally occur, is
certainly adequate to dissolve the comparatively small quantities
of soluble salts found in these infertile areas, if their removal were
a question of sufficient water only. In North Bihar the average
rainfall, in the sub-montane tracts where large alkali patches are
common, is about 50 to 60 inches a year. Arid conditions, there-
fore, are not essential for the production of alkali soils; heavy
rainfall does not always remove them. What is a’ necessary con-
dition is -impermeability. In India whenever the land loses its
porosity, by the constant surface irrigation of stiff soils with a
tendency to impermeability, by the accumulation of stagnant sub-
soil water, or through some interference with the surface drainage, ©
alkali salts sooner or later appear. Almost any agency,-even over-
cultivation and over-stimulation by means of artificial manures,
both of which oxidize the organic matter and slowly destroy the —
crumb structure, will produce alkali land. In the neighbourhood
of Pusa in North Bihar, old roads and the sites of bamboo clumps
and of certain trees such as the tamarind (Tamarindus indica L.) and
the pipul (Ficus religiosa L.), always give rise to alkali patches when

[PAG 176]
SOME DISEASES OF THE SOIL 149

they are brought into cultivation. The densely packed soil of
such areas invariably shows the'bluish-green markings which are
“associated with the activities of those soil organisms whicli live
in badly aerated soils without a supply of free oxygen. A few
inches below the alkali patches, which occur on the stiff loess soils
of the Quetta Valley, similar bluish-green and brown markings
always occur. In the alkali zone in North Bihar, wells have always
to be left open to the air, otherwise the water is contaminated -
. by sulphuretted hydrogen, thereby indicating a well-marked re-
ductive phase in the deeper layers. In a sub-soil drainage experi-
ment on the black soils of the Nira valley in Bombay where
perennial irrigation was followed by the formation of alkali land,
« Mann and Tamhane found that the salt water which ran out of
these drains soon smelt strongly of sulphuretted hydrogen, and a
white deposit of f sulphur was formed at the mouth of each drain,
proving how strong were the reducing actions in this soil. Here
the reductive phase in alkali formation was unconsciously demon-
strated in an area where alkali salts were unknown until the land
was water-logged by over-irrigation and the oxygen-supply of the
- soil was restricted.

The view that the origin of alkali land is bound up with defective
soil aeration is supported by the recent work on the origin of salt-
water lakes in Siberia. In Lake Szira-Kul, between Bateni and
the mountain range of Kizill Kaya, Ossendowski observed in the
black ooze taken from the bottom of the lake and in the water a
certain distance from the surface an immense network of colonies
of sulphur bacilli which gave off large quantities of sulphuretted
hydrogen and so destroyed practically all the fish in this lake.

’ The great water basins in Central Asia are being metamorphosed
in a similar way into useless reservoirs of salt water, smelling
strongly of hydrogen sulphide. In the limans near Odessa and
in portions of the Black Sea, a similar process is taking place. The
fish, sensing the change, are slowly leaving this sea as the layers
of water, poisoned by sulphuretted hydrogen, are gradually rising
towards the surface. The death of the Jakes scattered over the
immense plains of Asia and the destruction of the impermeable
soils of this continent from alkali salt formation are both duc to
the same primary cause—intense oxygen starvation. Often this

[PAG 177]
.

150 HEALTH; INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE

oxygen starvation occurs. naturally; in other: cases it follows
perennial i irrigation. DI _
The stages in the development of the alkali condition are some-
what as follows. The first condition is an impermeable soil. Such
soils—the usar plains of northern India for example—occur
naturally where the climatic conditions favour those biological and
physical factors which destroy the soil structure by disintegrating .

- the compound particles into their ultimate units. These latter,

are so extremely minute and so uniform in size that they form.
with water a mixture possessing some of the properties of colloids
which, when dry, pack into a hard dry mass, practically im-
permeable to water and very difficult to break up. Such soils are
very old. They have always been impermeable and have never
come into cultivation.
In addition to the alkali tracts which occur naturally a number

are in course of formation as the result of errors in soil‘ manage- ~

- ment, the chief of which are:

é

(a) The excessive use ofirrigation water. ‘This gradually destroys
the binding power of the organic cementing matter which glues
the soil particles together, and displaces the soil air. Anaerobic
changes, indicated by blue and brownish markings, first occur in
the lower layers and finally lead to the death of the soil. It is this
slow destruction of the living soil that must be prevented if the
existing schemes of perennial irrigation are to survive. The process
is taking place before our eyes to-day in the Canal Colonies of
India where irrigation is loosely controlled.

(b) Over-cultivation without due attention to the replenish--
ment ofhumus. In those continental areas like the Indo-Gangetic
plain, where the risk of alkali is greatest, the normal soils contain”
only a small reserve of humus, because the biological processes
which consume organic matter are very intense at certain seasons
duc to sudden changes from low to very high temperatures and
from intensely dry weather to periods of moist tropical conditions.
‘Accumulations of organic matter such as occur in temperate zones
are impossible. There is, therefore, a very small margin of safety.
The slightest errors in soil management will not‘only destroy the

- small reserve of humus in the soil but also the organic cement on

which the compound soil particles and the crumb structure depend.

[PAG 178]
SOME DISEASES OF THE SOIL 151

The result is impermeability, the first stage in the formation of
alkali salts..