=== An Agricultural Testament - Albert Howard.pdf — CHUNK 3/14 ===
Chars: 44,694 | Offset: 87,958



Let us review briefly the operations of Western agriculture from
the point of view of the utilization of wastes in order to discover
whether the gap between the losses and gains of humus, now
bridged by artificials, can be reduced or abolished altogether. If
this is possible, something can be done to restore the balance
of agriculture and to make it more stable and therefore more
permanent.

Many sources of soil organic matter exist, namely: (1) the roots
of crops, weeds, and crop residues which are turned under in the
course of cultivation; (2) the algae met with in the surface soil;
(3) temporary leys, the turf of worn-out grass land, catch crops,
and green-manures;' (4) the urine of animals; (5) farmyard
manure; (6) the contents of the dustbins of our cities and towns;
(7) certain factory wastes which result from the processing
of agricultural produce; (8) the wastes of the urban population;
(9) water-weeds, including seaweed. These must now be very
briefly considered. In later chapters most of these matters will be
referred to again and discussed in greater detail.

The residues turned under in the course of cultivation. It is not always
realized that about half of every crop—the root system—remains

D

[PAG 49]
‘34 SOIL FERTILITY IN AGRICULTURE.

in the ground at harvest time and thus provides a continuous
return of organic matter to the soil. The weeds and their roots
ploughed in during the ordinary course of cultivation add to this
supply. When these residues, supplemented by the fixation of
nitrogen from the atmosphere, are accompanied by skilful soil
management, which safeguards the precious store of humus, crop
production can be maintained at a low level without the addition
of any manure whatsoever beyond the occasional droppings of
live stock and birds. A good example of such a system of farming
without manure is to be found in the alluvial soils of the United
Provinces in India where the field records of ten centuries prove
that the land produces small crops year after year without any
falling offin fertility. A perfect balance has been reached between
the manurial requirements of the crops harvested and the-natural
processes which recuperate fertility. The greatest care, however,
is taken not to over-cultivate, not to cultivate at the wrong time,
or to stimulate the soil processes by chemical manures. Systems
of farming such as these supply.as it were the base-line for agricul-
tural development. A similar though not so convincing result is
provided by the permanent wheat plot at Rothamsted, where this
crop has been grown on the same land without manure since 1844. _
This plot, which has been without manute of any kind since 1839,
showed a slow decline in production for the first eighteen years,
after which the yield has been practically.constant. The reserves
of humus in this case left over from the days of mixed farming
evidently lasted for nearly twenty years. There are, however, two
obvious weaknesses in this experiment. This plot does not repre-
sent any system of agriculture, it only speaks for itself. Nothing ‘
has been done to prevent earthworms and other animals from
bringing in a constant supply of manure, in the shape of their
wastes, from the surrounding land. It.is much too small to yield
a significant result. :

Soil algae are a much more important factor in the tropics than
in temperate regions. Nevertheless they occur in all soils and often
play a part in the maintenance of soil fertility. Towards the end .
of the rainy season in countries like India a thick algal film occurs
on the surface of the soil which immobilizes a large amount of
combined nitrogen otherwise likely to be lost by leaching.

[PAG 50]
THE RESTORATION OF FERTILITY È 35

While this film is forming cultivation is suspended and weeds are
allowed to grow. Just before the sowing of the cold weather crops
in October the land is thoroughly cultivated, when this easily
decomposable and finely divided organic matter, which is rich in
nitrogen, is transformed into humus and then into nitrates. How
far a similar method can be utilized in colder countries is a matter
for investigation. Ini the East cultivation always fits in with the
life-cycle in a remarkable way. In the West cultivation is regarded
as an end in itself and not, as it should be, as a factor in the wheel
of life. Europe has much to learn from Asia in the cultivation of
the soil. -

Temporary leys, catch-crops, green-manures, and the turf of worn-out
grass land are perhaps the most important source of humus in
Western agriculture. All these crops develop a large root system;
the permanent and temporary leys give rise to ample residues of
organic matter which accumulate in the surface soil. Green-
manures and catch-crops develop a certain amount of soft and
easily decomposable tissue. Provided these crops are properly
utilized a large addition of new humus can be added to the soil.
The efficiency of these methods of maintaining soil fertility could,
however, be very greatly increased.

The urine of animals. The key substance in the manufacture of
humus from vegetable wastes is urine—the drainage of the active
cells and glands of the animal. It contains in a soluble and
balanced form all the nitrogen and minerals, and in all probability
the accessory growth-substances as well, needed for the work of
the fungi and bacteria which break down the various forms of
cellulose—the first step in the synthesis of humus. It carries in all
probability every raw material, known and unknown, discovered
and undiscovered, needed in the building up of a fertile soil.
Much of this vital substance for restoring soil fertility is cither
wasted or only imperfectly utilized. This fact alone would explain
the disintegration of the agriculture of the West.

Although farm-yard manure has always been one of the principal
means of replenishing soil losses, even now the methods by which
this substance is prepared are nothing short of deplorable. The
making of farm-yard manure is the weakest link in the agriculture
of Western countries. For centuries this weakness has been the

[PAG 51]
36 SOIL FERTILITY IN AGRICULTURE.

fundamental fault of Western farming, one completely overlooked
by many observers and the great majority of i investigators. _

Dustbin refuse. Practically no agricultural use is now being made
of the impure cellulose‘and kitchen wastes which find their way
into the urban dustbin. These are mostly buried in controlled
tips or burnt. I

Animal residues. A number of wastes connected with the pro-
cessing of food and some of the raw materials needed in industry
are utilized on the land and find a ready market. The animal
residues include such materials as dried blood, feathers, greaves,
hair waste, hoof and horn, rabbit waste, slaughter-house refuse,
and fish waste. There is a brisk demand’ for most of these sub- .
stances, as they give good results on the land, The only drawback
is the limited supplies available. The organic residues from manu-
facture consist of damaged oil-cakes, shoddy and tannery waste,
of which shoddy, a by-product of the wool industry, is the most
important. These two classes of wastes, animal and industrial,
are ‘applied to the soil direct and, generally speaking, command
much higher prices than would be expected from their content of
nitrogen, phosphorus, and potash. This is because the soil is in
such urgent need of humus and because the supply falls so far
short of the demand. It is probable that a better use for these
wastes will be found as raw materials for the compost heaps of the
future, where they will act as substitutes for urine in the breaking
down of dustbin refuse in localities where the supply of farm-yard
manure is restricted.

Water weeds. Little use is made of water weeds in maintaining
soil fertility. Perhaps the most useful of these is seaweed, which is
thrown up on the beaches in large quantities at certain times of
the year and which contains iodine and includes the animal resi-
dues needed for converting vegetable wastes into humus. Many
of our sea-side resorts could easily manufacture from seaweed and
dustbin refuse the vast quantities of humus needed for the farms
and market gardens in their neighbourhood and so balance the
local agriculture. Little or nothing, however, is being done in
this direction. In some cases the seaweed collection on pleasure
beaches is taken up by the farmers with good résults, but the
systematic utilization of seaweed in the compost heap is still. a

[PAG 52]
THE RESTORATION OF FERTILITY © ‘37

matter for the future. The streams and rivers which carry off the
surplus rainfall also contain appreciable quantities of combined
nitrogen and minerals in solution. Much of this could be inter-
cepted by the cultivation of suitable plants on the borders of these
streams which would furnish large quantities of easily decompos-
able material for humus manufacture.

The night soil and urine of the population is at present almost
completely. lost to the land. In urban areas the concentration of
the population is the main reason why water-borne sewage systems
have developed. The greatest difficulty in the path of the reformer
is the absence of sufficient land for dealing with these wastes. In
country districts, however, there are no insurmountable obstacles
to the utilization of human wastes.

It will be evident that in almost every case the vegetable and
animal residues of Western agriculture are either being completely
wasted or else imperfectly utilized. A wide gap between the humus
used up in crop production and the humus added as manure has
naturally developed. This has been filled by chemical manures.
The principle followed, based on the Liebig tradition, is that any
deficiencies in the soil solution can be made up by the addition of
suitable chemicals. This is based on a complete misconception of
plant nutrition. It is superficial and fundamentally unsound. It
takes no account of the life of the soil,-including the mycorrhizal
association—the living fungous bridge which connects soil and
sap. Artificial manures lead inevitably to artificial nutrition,
artificial food, artificial animals, and finally to artificial men
and women.

The ease with which crops can be grown with chemicals has
made the correct utilization of wastes much more difficult. Ifa
cheap substitute for humus exists why not use it? The answer is
twofold. In the first place, chemicals can never be a substitute for
humus because Nature has ordained that the soil must live and
the mycorrhizal association must be an essential link in plant
nutrition. In the second place, the use of such a substitute cannot
be cheap because soil fertility—one of the most important assets
of any country—is lost; because artificial plants, artificial animals,
and artificial men are unhealthy and can only be protected from
the parasites, whose duty it is to remove them, by means of poison

[PAG 53]
38 SOIL FERTILITY IN AGRICULTURE

sprays, vaccines and serums and an expensive system of patent
medicines, panel doctors, hospitals, and so forth. When the finance
of crop production is considered together with that of the various
social services which are needed to repair the consequerices of an
unsound agriculture, and when it is borne in mind that our
greatest possession is a healthy, virile population, the cheapness
of artificial manures disappears altogether. In the years to come
chemical manures will be considered as one of the greatest follies
of the industrial epoch. The teachings of the agricultural econo»
mists of this period will be dismissed as superficial.

In the next section of this book the methods by which. the agri-
culture of the West can be reformed-and balanced and the use of
artificial manures given up will be discussed.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

CLARKE, G. ‘Some Aspects of Soil Improvement in relation to Crop Production’,
Proc. of the Seventeenth Indian Science Congress, Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta,

1930, p. 23.

Hatt, Str A. DanieL. The Improvement of Native Agriculture in relation to Population and
Public Health, Oxford University Press, 1936.

Howarp, A., and Wap; Y. D. The Waste Products of Agriculture: their Utilization as
Humus, Oxford University Press, 1931.

Mann, H. H., Jos, N. V., and KANITKAR, N. V. ‘The Rab System of Rice Cultiva-
tion in Western India’, Mem. of the Dept. of Agriculture in India (Chemical Series),
ii, 1912, p. 141.

Manures and Manuring, Bulletin 36 of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, H.M.
Stationery Office, 1937.

[PAG 54]
PART II l
THE INDORE PROCESS

CHAPTER IV
THE INDORE PROCESS

TE Indore Process for the manufacture of humus from vege-
table and animal wastes was devised at the Institute of Plant
Industry, Indore, Central India, between the years 1924 and
1931. It was named after the Indian State in which it originated,
in grateful remembrance of all the Indore Darbar did to make my
task in Central India easier and more pleasant.

Although the working out of the actual process only took seven
years, the foundations on which it is based occupied me for more
than a quarter of a century. Two independent lines of thought
and study led up to the final result. One of these concerns the
nature of disease and is discussed more fully in Chapter XI under
the heading—‘The Retreat of the Crop and the Animal before the
Parasite’. It was observed in the course of these studics that the
maintenance of soil fertility is the real basis of health and of resis-
tance,to disease. The various parasites were found to be only
secondary matters: their activities resulted from the breakdown
of a complex biological system—the soil in its relation to the plant
and to the animal—due to improper methods of agriculture, an
impoverished soil, or to a combination of both.

The second line of thought arose in the course of nineteen years
(1905-24) spent in plant-breeding at Pusa, when it was gradually
realized that the full possibilities of the improvement of the variety
can only be achieved when the soil in which the new types are
grown is provided with an adequate supply of humus. Improved
varieties by themselves could be relied upon to give an increased
yield in the neighbourhood of 10 per cent.: improved varicties
plus better soil conditions were found to produce an increment up
to 100 per cent. or even more. As an addition of even 10 per cent.
to the yield would ultimately impose a severe strain on the frail
fertility reserves of the soils of India and would gradually lead to
their impoverishment, plant-breeding to achieve any permanent

[PAG 55]
40 ~ THE INDORE PROCESS

success would have to include a continuous addition to the
humus content of the small fields of the Indian cultivators.
The real problem was not the improvement of the variety but
how simultaneously to make the variety and the soil more
efficient. .
By about the year 1918 these two hitherto independent ap-
proaches to the problems of crop production—by way of pathology
and by way of plant-breeding—began to coalesce. It became
clearer and clearer that agricultural research itself was involved
in the problem; that the organization was responsible for the
failure to recognize the things that matter in agriculture and would
therefore have to be reformed; the separation of work on crops
into such compartments as plant-breeding, mycology, entomology,
and so forth, would have to be given up; the plant would have to
be studied in relation to the soil on the one hand arid to the agricul-
tural practices of the locality on the other. An approach to the’
problems of crop production on such a wide front was obviously
impossible in a research institute like Pusa in which the work on ©
crops was divided into no less than six separate sections. The
working out of a method of manufacturing humus from waste
‘ products and a study of the reaction of the crop to improved soil
conditions would encroach on the work of practically every section
of the Institute. As no progress has ever been made in science
without complete freedom, the only way of studying soil fertility
as one subject appeared to be to found a new institute in which the
plant would be the centre of the subject and where science and
practice could be brought to bear on the problem without any
consideration of the existing organization of agricultural research.
Thanks to the support of a group of Central Indian States and a
large grant from the Indian Central Cotton Committee, the Insti-
tute of Plant Industry was founded at Indore in 1924. Central
India was selected as the home of this new research centre for two
reasons: (1) the offer on a gg years’ lease of an area of 300 acres of
suitable land by the Indore Darbar, and (2) the absence in the
Central India Agency of any organized system of agricultural
. research such as had been established throughout British India.
This tract-therefore provided the land on the one hand and

freedom from interference on the other for the working out of a
. , ,

[PAG 56]
THE INDORE PROCESS 4At
new- approach, based on the humus content of the soil, to the
. problems underlying crop production.! ‘

The work at Indore accomplished two things: (1) the obsolete
character of the present-day organization of agricultural research
‘ .was demonstrated ; (2) a practical method of manufacturing humus
was devised.

The Indore Process was first described in detail in 1931 in
Chapter IV of The Waste Products of Agriculture. Since that date the
method has been taken up by most of the plantation industries
and also on many farms and gardens all over the world. In the
course of this work nothing has been added to the two main prin-
ciples underlying the process, namely, (1) the admixture of vege-
table and animal wastes with a base for neutralizing acidity, and
(2) the management of the mass so that the -micro-organisms
which do the work can function in the most effective manner. A
number of minor changes in working have, however, been sug-
gested. Some of these have proved advantageous in increasing the
output. In the following account the original description has
been followed, but all useful improvements have been incorpo-
rated: the technique has been brought up to date.

, THE RAW MATERIALS NEEDED

1. Vegelable Wastes. In temperate countries like Great Britain
these include—straw, chaff, damaged hay and clover, hedge and
bank trimmings, weeds including sea- and water-weeds, prunings,
hop-bine and hop-string, potato haulm, market-garden residues
including those of the greenhouse, bracken, fallen leaves, sawdust,
and wood shavings. A limited amount of other vegetable material
like the husks of cotton seed, cacao, and ground nuts as well as
banana stalks are also available near some of the large cities.

In the tropics and sub-tropics the vegetable wastes consist of
very similar materials including the vegetation of waste arcas,
grass, plants grown for shade and green-manure, sugar-canc leaves
and ‘stumps, all crop residues not consumed by live stock, cotton
stalks, weeds, sawdust and wood shavings, and plants grown for
providing compostable material on the borders of fields, road-
sides, and any vacant corners available.

* An account of the organization of the Institute of Plant Industry was published
as The Application of Science to Crop-Produetion by the Oxford University Pres in 1929,

[PAG 57]
42 THE INDORE PROCESS"

A continuous supply of mixed dry vegetable wastes throughout

the year, in a proper state of division, is the chief factor in the:
process. The ideal chemical composition of these materials should *
be such that, after being used as bedding for live stock, the carbon:
’ nitrogen ratio is in the neighbourhood of 33:1. The material
should also be in such a physical condition that the fungi and
bacteria can obtain ready access to and break down the tissues
without delay. The bark, which is the natural protection of the
celluloses and lignins against the inroads of fungi, must first be
destroyed. This is the reason why all woody materials—such as
cotton and pigeon-pea stalks—were always laid on the roads at
Indore and crushed by- the traffic into a fine state of division
before composting.

All over the world one of the first objections to the adoption of
‘the Indore Process is that there is nothing worth composting or
only small supplies of such material. In practically all such cases
any shortage of wastes has soon been met by a.more effective use
of the land and by actually growing plants for composting on
every possible square foot of soil. If Nature's way of using sun-
light to the full in the virgin forest is compared with that on the
average farm or on the average tea and rubber estate, it will be
seen what leeway can be made up in growing suitable material
for making humus. Sometimes the objection is heard that all this
will cost too much. The answer is provided by the dust-bowls of
North America. The soil must have its manurial rights or farming
dies. .

2. Animal Residues. The animal residues ordinarily available all
over the world are much the same—the urine and dung of live ~
stock, the droppings of poultry, kitchen waste including bones. .
Where no live stock is kept and animal residues are not available,
substitutes such as dried blood; slaughter-house refuse, powdered
hoof and horn, fish manure, and so forth can be employed. The
waste products of the animal in some form or another are essential
if real humus is to be made for the two following reasons.

(a) The verdict given by mother earth between humus made
with animal residues and humus made with chemical activators
like calcium cyanamide and the various salts of ammonia has
always been in favour of the former. One has only to feel and.

[PAG 58]
THE INDORE PROCESS 43

smell a handful of compost made by these twa methods to under-
stand the plant’s preference for humus made with animal residues.
‘The one is soft to the feel with the smell of rich woodland earth:
the other is often harsh to the touch with a sour odour. Some-
times when the two samples of humus made from similar vegetable
wastes-are analysed, the better report is obtained by the compost
made with chemical activators. When, however, they are applied
to the soil the plant speedily reverses the verdict of the laboratory.
Dr. Rayner refers to this.conflict between mother earth and the

‘ analyst, in the case of some composts suitable for forestry nurseries,
in the following words:

‘Full chernical analyses are now available for a number of these
composts, and it is not without interest to recall that in the initial stages
of the work a competent critic reported on one of them—since proved
to be among the most effective—on a basis of comparative analysis, as
“an organic manure of comparatively little value”; while another—
since proved least successful of all those tested—was approved as a

“first-class organic manure”’.’

The activator used in the first case was dried blood, in the second
case an ammonium salt.

(6) No permanent or effective system of agriculture has ever
been devised without the animal. Many attempts have been
made, but sooner or later they break down. The replacement of
live stock by artificials is always followed by discase the moment
the original store of soil fertility is exhausted.

Where live stock is maintained the collection of their waste
products—urine and dung—in the most effective manner is
important.

At Indore the work-cattle were kept in well-ventilated sheds
with earthen floors and were bedded down daily with mixed
vegetable wastes including about 5 per cent. by volume of hard
resistant material such as wood shavings and sawdust. The cattle
slept on this bedding during the night when it was still further
broken up and impregnated with urine. Next morning the soiled
bedding and cattle dung were removed to the pits for composting;
the earthen floor was then swept clean and all wet places were
covered with new earth, after scraping out the very wet patches.
In this way all the urine of the animals was absorbed; all smell in

[PAG 59]
44 THE INDORE PROCESS -

the. cattle sheds was avoided, and the brecding of flies i in the earth
underneath the animals was entirely prevented. A new layer of
bedding for the next day was then laid.

Every three months the earth under the cattle was changed,
the urine-impregnated soil was broken up in a mortar mill and
stored under cover near the compost pits. This urine earth; mixed _
with any wood ashes available, served as a combined activator .
and base in composting.

In the tropics, where there is abundahce of labour,-no difficulty
will be experienced in copying the Indore plan. All the urine can
be absorbed: all the soiled bedding can be used in n the compost
pits every morning. >

In countries like Great Britain and North America, where -
labour is both scarce and dear, objection will at once be raised to
the Indore plan. Concrete or pitched floors are here the rule.
The valuable urine and dung are often removed to the drains by
. a water spray. In such cases, however, the indispensable urine

could either be absorbed on the floors themselves by the addition

to the bedding of substances like peat and sawdust mixed with a

little earth, or the urine could be directed into small bricked pits

just outside the building, filled with any suitable absorbent which.
is periodically removed and renewed. In this way liquid manure

tanks can be avoided. At all costs the urine must be used for

composting.

3. Bases for Neutralizing Excessive Acidity. In the manufacture of
humus the fermenting mixture soon becomes acid in reaction.
This acidity must be neutralized, otherwise the work of the micro-
organisms cannot proceed at the requisite speed. A base is there-
fore necessary. Where the carbonates of calcium or potassium are
available in the form of powdered chalk or limestone, or wood

. ashes, these materials either alone, together, or mixed with earth,
provide a convenient base for maintaining the general reaction
within the optimum range (pH 7-0 to 8-0) needed by the micro-
organisms which break down cellulose. Where wood ashes,. lime-
stone, or chalk are not available, earth can be used’ by itself.
Slaked lime can also be employed, but it is not so suitable as the
carbonate. Quicklime is much too fierce a base. .

‘ 4.-Water and Air’ Water is needed during the whole of the,

[PAG 60]
THE INDORE PROCESS 45

period during which humus is being made. Abundant aeration
is also essential during the early stages. If too much water is used

_the aeration of the mass is impeded, the fermentation stops and ©
may.soon become anaerobic too soon. If too little water is em-
ployed the activities of the micro-organisms slow down and then
cease. The ideal condition is for the moisture content of the mass
to be maintained at about half saturation during the early stages,
as near as possible to the condition of a pressed- out sponge. Simple
as all this sounds, it is by no means easy in practice simultaneously
to maintain the moisture coritent and the aeration of a compost
heap so that the micro-organisms can carry out their work effec-
tively. The tendency almost everywhere is to get the mass too
sodden.

The simplest and most effective method of providing water and
oxygen together is whenever possible to use the rainfall—which
is a saturated solution of oxygen—and always to keep the ferment-
ing mass open at the beginning so that atmospheric air can enter
and the carbon dioxide produced can escape.

After the preliminary fungous stage is completed and the vege-
table wastes have broken down sufficiently to be dealt with by
bacteria, the synthesis of humus proceeds under anaerobic condi-
tions when no special measures for the aeration of the dense mass

are either possible or necessary.

PITS VERSUS HEAPS

Two methods of converting the above wastes into humus are in
common use. Pits or heaps can be employed.

Where the fermenting mass is liable to dry out or to cool very
rapidly, the manufacture should take place in shallow pits. A
considerable saving of water then results. The temperature of the
mass tends to remain high and uniform. Sometimes, however,
composting in pits is disadvantageous on account of watcr-logging
by storm water, by heavy rain, and by the rise of the ground-water
from below. All these result in a wet sodden mass in which an ©
adequate supply of air is out of the question. To obviate such
water-logging the composting pits are: (1) surrounded by a catch-
drain to cut off surface water; (2) protected by a thatched roof
where the rainfall is high and heavy bursts of monsoon rain arc

[PAG 61]
46 THE INDORE PROCESS

| the rule; or (3) provided with soakaways at suitable points com-
bined with-a slight slope of the floors of the pit towards the drain- -
age corner. Where there is a pronounced rise in the water-table
during the rainy season, care must be taken, in siting the pits, that
they are so placed that there is no invasion of water from below.

To save the expense of digging pits and to use up sites where
excavation is out of the question, composting in heaps is practised.
A great deal can be done to increase the efficiency of the heap by
protecting the composting area from storm water by means of
catch-drains and by suitable shelter from wind, which often pre-
vents all fermentation on the more exposed sides of the-heap. In
temperate climates heaps should always face the south, and where-
ever possible should be made in front of a south wall and be
protected from wind on the east and west. The effect of heavy
rain in slowing down fermentation can be reduced by increasing’
the size of the heap as much as possible. Large heaps always do
better than small ones.

In localities of high monsoon rainfall like Assam and Ceylon,
there is a definite tendency to provide the heap or the pit with a
grass roof so that the fermentation can proceed at an even rate
and so that the annual output is not interfered with by temporary
water-logging. After a year or two of service the roof itself is
composted. In Great Britain thatched hurdles can be used.

CHARGING THE HEAPS OR PITS

A convenient size for the compost pits (where the annual output |
is in the neighbourhood of 1,000 tons) is 30 feet by 14 feet and
3 fect deep with sloping sides. The depth is the most important
dirnension on account of the aeration factor.. Air percolates the
fermenting, mass to a depth of about 18 to 24 inches only, so for a
height of 36 inches extra aeration must be provided. This is
arrangéd by means of vertical vents, every 4 feet, made by a
light crowbar as each section of the pit is charged.

Charging a pit 30 feet long takes place in six sections each
5 feet wide. The first section, however, is left vacant to allow of
the contents being turned. The second section is first charged.
A layer of vegetable wastes abdut 6 inches deep is laid across the
pit to a width of 5 feet. This is followed by a layer of soiled bedding

[PAG 62]
THE INDORE PROCESS 47

or farm-yard manure 2 inches in thickness. The layer of manure
is then well sprinkled with a mixture of urine earth and wood
ashes or with earth alone, care being taken not to add more than
a thin film of about one-eighth of an inch in thickness, If toomuch
is added aeration will be impeded. The sandwich is then watered
where necessary with a hose fitted with a rose for breaking up the
spray. The charging and watering process is then continued as
before until the total height of the section reaches 5 feet. Three
vertical aeration vents, about 4 inches in diameter, are then made
in the mass by working a crowbar from side to side. The first vent
is in the centre, the other two midway between the centre and the .
sides. As the pit is 14 feet wide and there are three vents, thesc
will be 3 feet 6 inches apart. The next section of the pit (5 feet
wide) is then built up close to the first and watered as before.
When five sections are completed the pit is filled. The advan-
tages of filling a pit or making a heap in sections to the full height
of 5 feet are: (1) fermentation begins at once in each section and
no time is lost; (2) no trampling of the mass takes place; (3) acra-
tion vents can be made in each completed section without standing
on the mixture.

In dry climates each day’s contribution to the pit should again
be lightly watered in the evening and the watering repeated the
next morning. In this way the first watering at the time of charge
is added in three portions—one at the actual time of charging, in
the evening after charging is completed and again the next morn-
ing after an interval of twelve hours. The object of this procedure
is to give the mass the necessary time to absorb the water.

The total amount of water that should be added at the begin-
ning of fermentation depends on the nature of the material, on
the climate and on the rainfall. Watering as a rule is unnecessary
in Great Britain. If the material contains about a quarter by
volume of fresh greenstuff the amount of water needed can be
considerably reduced. In rainy weather when everything is on
the damp side no water at all is needed. Correct watering is a
matter of local circumstances and of individual judgement. At
no period should the mass be wet: at no period should the pit be
allowed to dry out completely. At the Iceni Nurseries in South
Lincolnshire in Great Britain, where the annual rainfall is about

[PAG 63]
48 THE INDORE PROCESS. .

24 inches and a good deal of fresh green market-garden refuse is
composted, watering the heaps at all stages is unnecessary. At
Indore in Central India where the rainfall was about 50 inches,

which fell in about four months, watering was always essential
except during the actual rainy season. These two examples prove
that no general rule can ever be laid down as to the amount of
water to be added in composting. The amount depends on circum-
stances. The water needed at Indore was from 200 to 300 gallons
for each cubic yard of finished humus.

As each section of the pit is completed, everything is ready for
the development of an active fungous growth, the first stage in
the manufacture of humus. It is essential to initiate this growth
as quickly as possible and then to maintain it. As a rule it is well
established by the second or third day after charging.’ Soon after
the first appearance of fungous growth the mass begins to shrink
and in a few days will just fill the pit, the depth being reduced to
about 36 inches.

Two things must be carefully watched for and prevented during
the first phase: (1) the establishment of anaerobic conditions
caused generally by over-watering or by want of attention to the
details of charging; it is at once indicated by smell and by the
appearance of flies attempting to breed in the mass; when this
occurs the pit should be turned at once; (2) fermentation may slow
down for want of water. In such cases the mass should be watered.
Experience will soon teach what amount of water is needed at the
time of charge. :

TURNING THE COMPOST
- To ensure uniform mixture and decay and to provide the neces-
sary amount of water and air for the completion of the aerobic
phase it is necessary to turn the material twice.

First turn. The first turn should take place between 2 and 3 weeks
after charging. The vacant space, about 5 feet wide, at the end _
of the pit allows the mass to be conveniently turned from one end
by means of a pitchfork. The fermenting material is piled up
loosely against the vacarit end of the pit, care being taken to turn
the unaltered layer in contact with the air into the middle of the
new heap. As the turning takes place, the mass is watered, if

[PAG 64]
THE INDORE PROCESS 49

necessary, as at the time of charging, care being taken to make the
material moist but not sodden with water. The aim should be to
provide the mass with sufficient moisture to carry on the fermenta-
tion to the second turn. To achieve this sufficient time must be
given for the absorption of water. The best way is to proceed as
at the time of charging and add any water needed in two stages—
as the turning is being done and again next morning. Another
series .of vertical air vents 3 feet 6 inches apart should be made
with a crowbar as the new heap is being made.
Second turn. About five weeks after charge the material is turned
a second'time but in the reverse direction. By this time the fungous
stage will be almost over, the mass will be darkening in colour and
the material will be showing marked signs of breaking down.
From now onwards bacteria take an increasing share in humus:
manufacture and the process becomes anaerobic. The second
turn is a convenient opportunity for supplying sufficient water for
completing the fermentation. This should be added during the
actual turning and again the next morning to bring the moisture
content to the ideal condition—that of a pressed-out sponge. It
will be observed as manufacture proceeds that the mass crumbles,
and that less and less difficulty occurs in keeping the material
moist. This is due to two things: (1) less water is needed in the
fermentation; (2) the absorptive and water-holding power of the
mass rapidly increase as the stage of finished humus is approached.
Soon after the second turn the ripening process begins. It is
during this period that the fixation of atmospheric nitrogen takes
place. Under favourable circumstances as much as 25 per cent.
of additional free nitrogen may be secured from the atmosphere.
The activity of the various micro-organisms which synthesize
+ humus can most easily be followed from the temperature records.
A very hightemperature, about 65° C. (149° F.), is established at
the outset, which continues with a moderate downward gradient
to 30° C. (86° F.) at the end of nincty days. This range fits in
well with the optimum temperature conditions required for the
micro-organisms which break down cellulose. The acrobic thermo-
phyllic bacteria thrive best between 40° C. (104° F.) and 55° C.
(131° F.). Before each turn, a definite slowing down in the fer-
mentation takes place: this is accompanied bya fallin temperature.
E

[PAG 65]
è.

{50 Di THE INDORE PROCESS

«As soon as the mass is re-made, when more thorough admixture

‘with copious aeration occurs, there is a renewal of activity
during which the undecomposed portion ‘of the vegetable matter
from the outside of the heap or pit is attacked. This activity is-
followed by a distinct rise in temperature.

THE STORAGE OF HUMUS i

Three months after charge the micro-organisms will have ful-
filled their task and humus will have been completely synthesized.
It is now ready for the land. If kept in heaps after ripening is
completed, a loss in efficiency must be faced. The oxidation pro-
cesses will continue. Nitrification will begin, resulting in the forma-
tion of soluble nitrates. These may be lost either by leaching
during heavy rain or they will furnish the anaerobic. organisms
with just the material they nced for their oxygen supply. Such
losses do not occur to anything like the same extent when the
humus is banked by adding it to the soil. Freshly ‘prepared humus

© is perhaps the farmer’s chief asset and must therefore be looked.

after as if it were actual money. It is-also an important section of

_ the live stock of the farm. Although this live stock can only be

seen under the microscope, it requires just as much thought and

. care as the pigs which can be seen with the naked eye. If humus ~

must be stored it should be kept under cover and turned from
time to time.
. OUTPUT

The output of compost per annum obviously depends on circum-
stances. At the Institute of Plant Industry, Indore, where the .
supply of urine and dung was always greater than that of vegetable
waste, fifty cartloads (each 27 c. ft.) of ripe compost, i.e. 1,350
cubic feet or 50 cubic yards, could be prepared from one pair of
oxen. Had sufficient vegetable wastes been available the quantity
could have been at least doubled. The work-cattle at Indore were
of the Malvi breed, about three-quarters the size of the average
milking-cow of countries like Great Britain. The urine and dung
of an average English cow or bullock, therefore, if properly com-
‘posted with ample wastes would produce about sixty cartloads of
humus a. year, equivalent to about 1,600 cubic feet or 60 cubic
yards.

[PAG 66]
-

THE INDORE PROCESS si
As the moisture content of htimus varies from go to Go per cent.

. during the year, it is impossible to record the output in tons unless

the percentage of water is determined. The difficulty can be over-
come by expressing the output in cubic feet or cubic yards. The
rate of application per acre should also be stated-as so many cubic
feet or cubic yards. .

In devising the Indore Process the fullest use was made of
agricultural experience including that of the past. After the
methods of Nature, as scen in the forest, the practices which
throw most light on the preparation of humus are those of the
Orient, which have been described by King in Farmers of Forly

Centuries. In China a nation of observant peasants has worked

out for itself simple methods of returning to the soil all the vege-
table, animal, and human wastes that are available: a dense
population has been maintained without any falling off in fertility.

Coming to the more purely laboratory investigations on the
production of humus, two proved of great value in perfecting the
Indore Process: (1) the papers of Waksman in which the supreme
importance of micro-organisms in the formation of humus was
consistently stressed, and (2) the work of H. B. Hutchinson and
E. H. Richards on artificial farm-yard manure. Waksman’s
insistence on the role of micro-organisms in the formation of
humus as well as on the paramount importance of the correct
composition of the wastes to be converted has done much to lift
the subject from a morass of chemical detail and empiricism on
to the broad plane of biology to which it rightly belongs. Once it
was realized that composting depended on the work of fungi and
bacteria, the reform of the various composting systems which are
to be found all over the world could be taken in hand. The essence
of humus manufacture is first to provide the organisms with the
correct raw material and then to ensure that they have suitable
working conditions. Hutchinson and Richards come nearest to
the Indore Process but two fatal mistakes were made: (1) the use
of chemicals instead of urine as an activator in breaking down
vegetable wastes, and (2) the patenting of the ADCO process.
Urine consists of the drainage of every cell and every gland of the
animal body and contains not only the nitrogen and mincrals

e | 19 MS

[PAG 67]
52 THE INDORE PROCESS

needed by the fungi and bacteria which break down cellulose, but_
all the accessory growth substances as well. The ADCO powders”
merely supply factory-made chemicals as well as lime—a far
inferior base to the wood ashes and soil used in the Indore Process.
It focuses attention on yield rather than on quality. It introduces
into composting the same fundamental mistake that is being made
in farming, namely, the use of chemicals instead ofnatural manure.
Further, the patenting of a process (even when, as in this case,
the patentees derive no personal profit) always places the investi-
gator in bondage; he becomes the slave to his own scheme; rigidity
takes the place of flexibility; progress then becomes difficult, or

even impossible. The ADCO process was patented in 1916: in ~~

1940 the method to all intents and purposes remains unchanged.

The test of any process for converting the waste products of
agriculture into humus is flexibility and.adaptability to every
possible set of conditions. It should also develop and be capable
of absorbing new knowledge and fresh points of view as they arise. ,
Finally, it should be suggestive and indicate new and promising
lines of research. If the Indore Process can pass these severe tests
it will soon become woven into the fabric of agricultural practice. -
It will then have achieved permanence and will have fulfilled its
purpose—the restitution of their manurial rights to the soils of -
this planet. In the next four chapters the progress made during
the last eight years towards this ideal will be described. _ ,

BIBLIOGRAPHY :

Howarp, A., and Howarp, G. L. C. The Application of. Science to Crp Proton,
Oxford University Press, 1929.

Howarp, A., and Wap, Y. D. The Waste Products of Arie: Their  Uilcation as
Humus, Oxford University Press, 1931.

[PAG 68]
.

CHAPTER V

PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF THE
a INDORE PROCESS