=== Electroculture (Christofleau Justin).pdf — CHUNK 1/3 ===
Chars: 44,691 | Offset: 0

[PAG 1]
ELECTROCULTURE

Mons. JUSTIN CHRISTOFLEAU
‘Member of

The Society of Scientists and Inventors
of France

ALEX. TROUCHET & SON
la Padbury?s Buildings, Forest Place;
Perth, Western Australia.

Sole Agents

ape oe trait sr; vents,
8 ala, at
ae Ca nga
De OR
do

AS MICI AIM III ITIIIICICISIAS

SAS 59
Printed \at-the Boys’ Home, Westmead.  UW8064

A

[PAG 2]
ELECTR@CULTURE

BY

MONS. JUSTIN CHRISTOFLEAU

Member of

The Society of Scientists and Inventors

of

France

[PAG 4]
ectroculture

BY

JUSTIN CHRISTOFLEAU,
Knight of Merit ‘of Agriculture. Gold Medallist of Society of
Encouragement for National Industries. Member of Society of
Scientists and Inventors of France. Foundation Member of National
Society of Agriculture. Member of Association of Manufacturers

and Inventors of France.

[PAG 6]
ELECTROCULTURE 5

MR. J. CHRISTOFLEAU’S APPEAL TO AGRICULTURISTS,
VITICULTURISTS AND HORTICULTURISTS OF THE
WORLD.

Laborious phalanx, to whom I have the honour to belong by my
birth, I come now towards you to raise my voice in favour of a great
invention which will be, if you understand me, one of the great
factors of the resurrection and prosperity of the whole world, as it
means the intensifying of the production of the earth, the increasing
of crops in considerable proportions, and minimising as much as
possible the manual labour appertaining to culture and the economis-
ing of the immense sums of money which are being spent annually
for fertilizers and replacing them by this new apparatus wherein are
condensed all the forces of nature. That is to say: The land mag-
netism, telluric currents, the electricity of the floating air and that
carried by the clouds, the sun, the wind, the rain, and even by the
frost, forces which are captured and transformed into energetic
electricity by this apparatus which carries them to the soil in a
FEEBLE AND CONTINUOUS MANNER, and which renders it free
from the microbes which attack the Seeds and Plants.

(Signed) J. CHRISTOFLEAU.

[PAG 8]
ELECTROCULTURE 7

1. Vibrating wires under the action of the wind

2. Electricity of the floating air carried by the
clouds,

3. South wee

+ 4. North

5. Thermo electric pile {action of the sun)

7. Voltaic pile (action of the rain)

6. Bolt for securing
the galvanised wire

aan E
1 5
8. Telluric Currents 1 oe
{Land Magnetism) 39,
I afa
ags
{ gam
4 5g
Ea
ma
(SI
=

ELECTROCULTURE.

Electroculture is a method of applying atmospheric electricity to
the fertilization of plant life, and has, during the past few years,
developed to such an extent that it_is to-day being practised in many
of the countries of the world, viz.: France, England, Canada, Germany,
Switzerland, Italy, Belgium, Denmark, Sweden, etc. Its success has
been so marked that there are upwards of a million apparatus in use
in these countries and its application is extending as its benefits
become better known.

The discoverer of this process is a well-known French scientist—
Mr. J. Christofieau—who devoted years of research to the develop-
ment and application of his process, and the apparatus, which he
finally perfected and patented throughout the world, is the result of
his efforts.

The apparatus referred to is illustrated above:—

[PAG 9]
8 ELECTROCULTURE

DESCRIPTION.

Terrestrial! Magnetism and Telluric Currents—The apparatus
must be firmly placed on a post at least 20 feet from the ground,
with the horizontal pointer pointing direct magnetic South, and the
perpendicular pointer to the sky.

No. 1. Atmospheric Electricity—The currents with which the
atmosphere is impregnated are captured by means of a perpendicular
pointer, and the aerial wires of the apparatus, which serve as a
eonductor, by which means the positive atmospheric electricity is
passed to the negative currents in the earth.

The horizontal pointer, which is pointing direct South, captures
the terrestrial magnetism and telluric currents which surround the
apparatus.

No. 2. The Sun’s Action—Inside the casing of the apparatus
are ridges, and outside are flanges corresponding with the thinnest
parts of the casing. When the apparatus is placed in position on
the post, with the pointer direct South, the rising sun naturally
strikes the eastern facet of the apparatus. The flanges on the outer
portion of the casing, serve to deflect the rays of the sun from the
thin part of the casing to the thick ridges. These flanges also being
exposed to the wind, cool the portion of the casing to which they
are attached. The resultant difference in temperatures causes an
electric “Depot,” or store, due to the metallic particles. The same
action takes place later on in the afternoon on the third facet, or
western side, of the apparatus, thus DURING THE WHOLE DAY
THE SUN CREATES AN ELECTRIC DEPOT IN THE WHOLE
APPARATUS.

Thermo Pile—Attached to the lower portion of the stem of the
apparatus is a tube, which consists of two pieces of metal—one being
copper and the other zine, joined together by two solderings, and
connected to the main stem, so that one of the solderings is exposed
to the heat of the sun, while the other, being underneath, is shaded
from its rays. This forms or generates an electric current from the
copper to the zinc, that is, a negative and positive current, which is
from there transmitted to that portion of the apparatus to which
the zine is attached.

The whole becomes a thermo electric magazine, and is brought
about by the action of the sun’s rays, and a contact of the zinc and
the copper metals.

The Effect of Cold and Frost.—Cold and frost both engender
electricity, due to the difference of temperatures transmitted to the
walls or casing of the apparatus in the same manner as described in
the preceding paragraph, under the heading of “The Sun’s Action.”

Effect of Wind.—The wind when blowing through the aerial wires
causes them to vibrate and capture the positive electricity with which
the air is charged.

Effect of the Rain.—On the top of the apparatus is a zinc saucer
to which is riveted a copper plate; the very contact of these two
metals alone is sufficient in itself to form an electric “Depot,” or
store, and, moreover, the saucer forms a receptacle for moisture
caused either from the humidity of the atmosphere, the rain, the
frost, or the dew.

This action on the zine and copper saucer converts it into a voltaic
battery. The apparatus itself being metallic and placed on a high post

[PAG 10]
ELECTROCULTURE 9
is cold and naturally serves to draw the moisture from the atmosphere.
All this electrical energy gathered by the apparatus is the positive
electricity of the atmosphere, which is transmitted to the soil by
means of the galvanised wire.

The galvanised wire in the soil is directed in a straight line
direct magnetic North for any distance required. This serves to
capture the magnetic land currents. It is the combination of posi-
tive electricity from the atmosphere and the negative electricity from
the earth which causes continual flux and reflux of natural elec-
tricity in the soil. This current destroys all the insects and parasites
which attack plant life by the very fact that the vibrations caused
are proportionately greater than the vibrations of the insects them-
selves.

Chemical transformations are formed, which will give to vege-
tation the fertilising elements and nitrogenous products which are
necessary to the nourishment and development of plant life.

NOTES BY M. JUSTIN CHRISTOFLEAU.

As far back as 1749 Abbe Nollett who seems to be the first
scientist who had noted the effects of electricity on vegetation,
announced that electricity contributed to the EVAPORATION OF
THE SOIL, facilitated the germination of seeds and increased the
quickness of the ascension of the sap in vegetation.

In 1783 Abbe Bertholon not only made known the role of atmos-
pheric electricity on vegetation in one of his works, but made its
practical application with an “electro-vegetometre” which he invented.

At a much later period, a Russian scientist, Spechnoff, perfected
the Electro-vegetometre, invented by Abbe Bertholon, and noted an
over-production of 62 per cent. for oats, 56 per cent. for wheat, 34
per cent. for linseed. M. Spechnoff, furthermore, has found that
the composition of the soil is modified by the action of the currents.

Towards the end of last century Brother Paulin, the Director of
the Agricultural Institute of Beauvais, invented a new apparatus, the
“Geomagnetifere,” which gave wonderful results, especially as regards
Grapes, which were richer in sugar and alcohol; their maturity was
more hastened and more regular,

It is shown by all the experiments made to this day by scientists
that the lands which were submitted to electricity have given crops
that are more than one-third, double and even treble, according to
the effectiveness of the apparatus and to the care given to its
installation, and, moreover, that those crops are preserved from the
microbes, the parasites and the epidemic diseases which are the
ruination of agriculturists, those microbes, etc., being destroyed by
electricity.

[PAG 11]
10 ELECTROCULTURE

In order that I should not be accused of invoking the testimony of
scientists who are long dead, it is pleasant for me to record the irre-
futable testimony of experiments made with my apparatus by a
number of persons of good repute who are actually living, who can
be questioned, and whose experiments have been, in some cases,
certified to by an officer of the Municipality.

J.C.

INSTALLATION INSTRUCTIONS

1.—Fix the apparatus firmly on the top of a 25ft. post, and make
secure with a wooden peg in the hole on the southern facet of the
apparatus.

2.—Bury the post 5ft. and face the pointer of the apparatus direct
South (magnetic), and the head of the apparatus magnetic North.
This is absolutely essential, as the entire functioning of the apparatus
derends on this. (See page 11).

8.—Tar the top of the post which is inserted into the apparatus,
and also the 5ft, of the post which is buried in the ground.

4--Attach No. 12 4g gauge soft pliable galvanised iron wire
to the bolt between the washer and the apparatus by a single “eye”
loop and wind the end tightly around the main “down” wire for 6in.;
then solder the end to make good contact. (See Fig. D, page 11).

5.—Insulate the main wire with 4 orb. porcelain insulators down
the side of the post, care being taken that the wire is kept taut.
(See Figs. A. and B. page 11)

6.—Use three stays, or “Guy” wires,” to prevent the post from
swaying in a heavy wind.

7.—Bury the wire 10 inches deep in a straight furrow, running
from the post in a line direct magnetic North to the end of the strip
of land which is to be electrified. In cases where the ground is to be
ploughed, the wire must be buried at least four inches deeper than
the depth of the plough. (See page 11).

8.—Use a double insulator, similar to those used for wireless
aerials, at the base of the post under the ground, where the main
wire turns at right angles from the post along the furrow. The wire
is threaded through the insulator, which is attached to the base of
the post by three short strands of strong wire. After the main wire
has been correctly laid and fixed at each end, ie., at the bolt of the
apparatus and the peg at the northern extremity of the field, the
short strands of wire holding the insulator at the base of the post
are then twisted, or “twitched” up, as taut as possible, thus making
the main wire in the furrow and down the post tight. (See page 1]).

9-—Where the wire is eut off at the northern boundary, it is
twisted firmly around a peg in the ground and the end of the wire

Dx 6. QA

10.—When establishing the correct direction for the furrow with
a compass, it should be placed on a piece of dry board and never
directly on the ground or within close proximity to any iron matter
or wire, etc., as the earth currents and iron will influence the
compass.

11.—The successful working of the apparatus depends entirely
on the precise direction of the pointer of the apparatus being South
(magnetic) and the underground wire being direct magnetic North.

[PAG 12]
x
3
ì
Dè
\ 3
\ i
yy ci
È
3

ELECTROCULTURE ll

Double insutator at
base of post,

the insidators, and 18 connected

Stratght down. the post besicte
to them by voti tie wire.

The Main Wire is passed

NOTE.

Uasiulaldrs,

SE

“BLOUL LO JPY OF

[PAG 13]
12 ELECTROCULTURE

12—It is necessary to use dry timber for the post on which the
apparatus is fixed, as green timber is apt to warp and thus throw
the point of the apparatus out of direction.

13 —It is advisable to test the direction of the pointer from time
to time in case the post has twisted. A good method for doing this
is to drive two wooden pegs into the post, about 5 feet apart from
each other, in a line directly under the pointer; the points thus being
kept in an exact line. It is then easy to test the direction of the
pointer by looking upwards from the bottom peg to the top point
to see if all three are still in line; if not, it is necessary to re-set
the apparatus with a good compas.

14--Care must be taken to remove any roots or stones which lie
in the course of the furrow.

15.—The wire must not be wound around the insulators on the
post, but passed down the side and made fast to the insulator by
means of a pièce of light gauge ‘tie’ wire. (See Fig. B, pagell).

APPLICATION TO VINES PROVIDED WITH WIRES.

The electrifying of vines that are on wires is very simple, and is
considerably helped by the wires which are themselves charged with
electricity.

As the apparatus influences a strip of ground 14ft. wide, if the
rows of vines are 14ft. or less apart, it is advisable to place the
post with the apparatus on it at the Southern end, equidistant be-
tween the rows, and run the wire in a straight furrow down the
centre of the rows to a point direct North (magnetic) from the
apparatus.

In cases where the rows are more than 14ft. apart, the apparatus
can be placed at the Southern end of each row, and the wire directed
in a furrow running North and within a few feet of the butts of
the vines.

As a second method of applying the apparatus to a row of vines
(See diagram on page 13). The main wire from the Apparatus; may
be attached to the top wire of the trellis, provided that the wire is
of a suitable nature, i.e., 12 or 124 gauge, soft and pliable, galvanised
iron wire, and droppers of the same gauge wire are attached (see
diagram on page 13).

The dropper wire is to protrude for 16 inches above the main
top trellis wire, then passed in a perpendicular direction down, and
buried 18 inches into the ground.

Of the two methods, the former is the most advisable. In both
cases, it is essential, of course, that the rows of vines run direct
South-North (magnetic).

[PAG 14]
13

ELECTROCULTURE

*SQII AA UO SOUTA 0} uoggoddy
NM LES tc UU 4 MELTS SAR A

yy

[PAG 15]
14 ELECTROCULTURE

NOTE.

As the electricity goes well beyond the end where the wire has
been cut off, and in order to prevent this escape into a neighbouring
field, a barrage can be easily established by burying one peg at
each extremity and fixing the same gauge wire and at the same depth
as the main wire, 6 ft. from the Northern Boundary.

Ry Leeann

=
»
“

ta >

Ztpe danaro ne + coceprenionenize ennio mandino pee can erca sazio ssergrezcenna susonne. cows rarse ema

H
<
i
»
~

[PAG 16]
ELECTROCULTURE 15
FOR VINES RUNNING EAST AND WEST.

Erect posts 20ft. above the ground to carry the apparatus at
the Southern end of the vineyard; the posts 14ft. apart, with an 8ft.
strainer post direetly opposite, each apparatus at the North end of
the field.

Connect number 12 or 123 gauge soft and pliable galvanised iron
wire to the apparatus, insulating it down the post for 13ft.; then
connect (using insulators) with the strainer post on the Northern
boundary, the wire passing over each trellis to be connected to a
dropper of the same gauge wire, but droppers to be left 16 inches
above the aerial wire and buried 18 inches in the ground (see diagram
on page 54).

The effect of the apparatus on vines, apart from destroying
insects, parasites, etc., by the very fact that the vibrations caused
in the ground are higher than the vibrations of the insects them-
selves, 1s to create fertilising matter, and the nitrogenous products
which gives to each vine prodigious strength, thus enabling it to
successfully resist mildew and odium. For three years the spraying
and sulphuring of vines may be greatly decreased, and after five
years can be eliminated altogether,

Electrified vines will increase the crop in a considerable propor-
tion, and the grapes themselves will be richer in sugar and in alcohol,
thus making them more suitable for export trade.

APPLICATION TO A ROW OF TREES.

When a row of trees is to be electrified, no matter what its
length may be, provided that it runs direct South-North, the apparatus
is placed on a post 20ft. above the ground at the Southern end of
the trees, and as is the case with vines, if the rows of trees are
14ft. or less apart, place the post with the apparatus equidistant
between the rows at the Southern end, and run the wire in the furrow
down the middle of the rows in a direct line to a point on the Northern
boundary. If the rows are more than 14ft. apart, place the apparatus
and post near the head of the row, and run the wire in the furrow
North from it, passing within a few feet of the butts of the trees.

Trees treated in this manner will be more vigorous and make
quicker growth, and the fruit produced is larger, sweeter, and will
ripen two weeks in advance of the non-electrified trees. The fruit
contains more alcohol, and will keep better, and thus be more suitable
for export trade.

Cereals will contain more carbo-hydrate.

[PAG 17]
16 ELECTROCULTURE

vu; ip
LEA ALAN,
Ly
LL

%
MA

APPLICATION TO ISOLATED TREES.

Electrification of a Single Tree.—It is very easy to electrify one
single tree. The apparatus is placed within three feet of it, the tree
being North of the apparatus. The galvanised wire is buried 15 or
16 inches at the base of the tree, and a few buckets of water (pre-
ferably rain water) are thrown where the wire is buried. After a
few months the tree will gain a new vigor, and, if it is ailing, it will
throw out new shoots and will rapidly improve.

[PAG 18]
ELECTROCULTURE ave

ELECTROCULTURE

By GEORGE BLANCHARD.

SCIENTIFIC CHAT.

The omission of a correction in the text of a pamphlet makes me
state that electricity killed “ALL” the parasites of the soil. This
word “ALL” is misleading at least in what concerns electricity of
low voltage such as supplied by the Christofleau apparatus, for cur-
rents able to kill all parasites would also destroy vegetation.

Atmospheric electricity, like all currents of low intensity, destroys
cryptogamic diseases of vegetation which is already a great point.
Currents of 110 and 220 volts are more deadly to plant parasites than
low currents, but THEY ARE NOT innocuous to the plant itself.

If a current of 110 volts is conveyed to the soil during several
hours per day it can, as shown by M. Breton, exercise a slightly
favourable influence on vegetation, but the Hungarian Professor
Kovessi showed in 1912 that the same current applied CONTINU-
OUSLY was absolutely detrimental to vegetation which it eradicated
altogether.

I intentionally pass over all the other methods of applying
electricity to cultivation (ie, INDUCTION CURRENTS, HIGH
TENSION ELECTRIC LIGHT, ULTRA VIOLET RAYS, Etc.). They
are all mentioned in the minutes of the First Congress of Electro-
culture, that was held at Rheims in 1912, under the presidency of
Professor Armand Gauthier. They have for me an experimental
value certainly, but they are less interesting than the method which
I am about to relate.

Proofs are forthcoming daily in favour of this theory which is
THE ONLY RATIONAL METHOD of applying electricity to the life
and to the diseases of plants, of human beings and of animals, and
this formula will purvey the whole of the electrotherapy and electro-
culture, i.e., THE CONTINUOUS FLOW OF A CURRENT OF LOW
INTENSITY.

The recent scientific work of A. Lumiere tells us of organic
liquid composed of celloids whose grains called by him “micelles”
or “electrical granules,” are charged with contrary electricity inside
and outside.

However we view this world of infinitely “smalls” animated by
continuous movement due to the attraction of the contrary poles, and to
repulsions of identical poles, and we see ourselves forced from deduc-
tion to deduction, to consider the electrical fluid as the true vital fluid
regulating the circulation of the sap like that of blood and perform-
ing its task of exchange in favouring all the exchanges and the
elaboration of the indispensable products to the maintenance of life.

[PAG 19]
LECTROCULTURE

E

18

‘8890010 910}[N201392[%{ oy, £quao1d s}ue|j o}uuiof

[PAG 20]
ELECTROCULTURE 19

Although they are in the domain of hypothesis, it is well to
meditate upon the conceptions of Chardin and Lumiere, for they are
not contrary to any scientific principle and no one has, so far,
doubted them.

Electricity is so weak that it almost escapes our investigations.
Chardin easily concludes it is ridiculous to come to its help with
powerful currents.

If it is stated that electricity has caused cures by suggestion to
human beings, ore cannot have such pretention as regards an animal
or a plant.

I was therefore already cognisant of this method and convinced
of the bad effects and the uselessness of the CURRENTS WHICH
GAVE SHOCKS when by chance I became acquainted with the process
of electroculture as practised by M. Christofleau.

1 was immediately attracted by the way the electricity acted on
vegetation, showing thus the greatest analogy with its actions on
human beings and animals; analogy between the feeble current
applied in PUERICULTURE, and the feeble current applied to the
culture of plants; analogy between the human and veterinary thera-
peutical action, and the curing of the diseases of vegetation—analogy
between the fatal action of intense currents on human beings, and
animals and that no less fatal action of those currents on plant life.

I would therefore have lacked: curiosity if I had not studied
electroculture comparatively, as it touched so much on .the electro-
therapy which I practised.

This is how I became, therefore, a fervent disciple of electro-
culture. It is not through candour I became an apostle of the Christo-
fleau method, and my convictions repose on the experiments I have
made personally,

Abbe Nollett, Secretary of the Academy of Science, Berthollon,
Paulin, Spechnoff, Becquorel and the great Marcelin Berthelot, were
not hallucinated persons. Have not the two last mentioned shown
the INDISPUTABLE INFLUENCE OF ELECTRICITY ON THE
FIXATION OF THE NITROGEN BY THE SOIL AND THE
PLANTS? Is it not known already that under the influence of the
current the nitrification of the soil is produced, GIVING BIRTH TO
THE NITRATES, TO CYANAMIDE which are excellent fertilising
nitrogenous elements? When a plant is submitted to absolute dark-
ness not only does it not develop, but rapidly perishes, whereas, if a
feebie electric current is passed into the vase which contains it, the
plant will not only develop itself, but will reach perfect fructification.
In order to explain this fact, M. Basty stated at the Congress of
Rheims that the artificial current replaced in this case, the SOLAR
ELECTRICITY WHICH IS INDISPENSABLE TO VEGETATION.

ONE FINDS IN THE ELECTRIFIED PLOTS OF LAND
DOUBLE THE HUMIDITY OF THAT IN THE COMPARATIVE
PLOTS AND THIS IS EXPLAINED BY THE LIBERATION OF
MOLECULES OF WATER DUE TO THE CHEMICAL REACTIONS

[PAG 21]
20 ELECTROCULTURE

OF ELECTROLYSIS AS SHOWN BY THE INCONTESTIBLE
SUPERIORITY OF ELECTROCULTURE OVER THE CHEMICAL
MANURES IN TIMES OF DROUGHT.

The above scientific statements can only interest agriculturists
by exposing to them the practical results obtained.

I will not refer to the experiments made at Metz by the French
Government, for the results of these experiments have been com-
municated to the inventor himself and not to me. I could again
speak of.the marvellous results obtained in Belgium in the culture
of beetroot with the chemical analysis attached, and also of the
results made known to me by the Society of Electroculture of Switzer-
land, and of those results obtained in forcign countries. All those
results will be published later on. For the time being my readers
would be quite correct in stating those countries are far away, and
it is therefore difficult to control those experiments. Let us speak,
therefore, of the French experiments exclusively. Must one tell
the sceptics and the incredulous that two years successivelv a grower
has been able to crop two beautiful crops of beetroot, and one knows
how beetroot drains the soil, so much so that it is generally grown in
the same soil but EVERY THIRD YEAR.

One of my correspondents, M. Fernand Frison. 56 Awvingt-
street, Cambrai, told me of a fact which is still more extraordinary.
“A field of rye was cut when 22 inches high and given to cattle: the
rye grew again and had beautiful ears. The second time 1t was
cut I noted some of the shoots were 4ft. 6in. high. The stalks and
the ears of this second crop were more beautiful than those in the
neighbouring field which had not been cut when green.” Please
note that usually one never cuts two crops of rye.

On the 16th August, 1925, I gave a conference at the Agricultural
Comice of l’Isle-sur-le-Doubs and to which the professors of agricul-
ture of that region attended. During my conference I cited the
following results, which were obtained at the place named “Croix
de Mission,” on a plot of land that was electrified. The oats cropped
there have grown on an average 4ft. and had 54 grains to the car.
On the comparative crop which was not electrified the average height
of the oats was 32 inches, and the ears contained but 29 grains. It is
necessary to state that the crop of oats for that year was somewhat
deficient, and the agriculturists who were present admired the results
of the crop that was electrified and rendered homage to facts.

[PAG 22]
CTROCULTURE

ELE

A BORDER OF PARSLEY

[PAG 23]
22 ELECTROCULTURE

APPLICATION OF ELECTRICITY TO PLANT LIFE.
By Mons G. Blanchard.

(Translated from the French.)

The main object of “ELECTROCULTURE” is to make known to
Agriculturists some of the forces of nature which can be utilised
to advantage.

A French inventor—Mr. J. Christofleau—has demonstrated that
there is no need for manures to fertilise the soil, and that nature—
and nature alone—is rich enough in itself to provide the necessary
nourishment to plant life. The sun’s rays, rain, nitrogen of the
air, atmospheric electricity carried by clouds, all these elements can
be utilised to take the place of manures.

If manure is used to intensify the growth, it must not be assumed
that the chemical products have a direct influence on vegetation.
The facts are:—All chemical bodies, which decompose, give forth an
electric current, and it is to this electric current which is due to the
decomposition of manures in the ground which gives to vegetation
the necessary fluid for the intense development of the plant.

The elements from the atmosphere bring far more nourishment
to the plants than the soil itself and strengthen our statement that
if chemical fertilisers intensify the production it is because their
decomposition in the soil PRODUCES AN ELECTRIC CURRENT
WHICH STRENGTHENS THAT OF THE ATMOSPHERE.

The capture of atmospheric electricity to the benefit of culture
is, therefore, an invention of the greatest importance and only
sceptics will refuse to make use of this natural force which costs
nothing.

In order to intensify the crops one cannot expect the forces of
nature unaided to fertilise the soil. They must be captured, drained
and directed where they are required, and this is what Mr. Christo-
ficau’s apparatus will do. The results of electrifying crops are very
marked:

1. Ina field that was not manured nor irrigated, but influenced
by Mr. Christofleau’s apparatus, cats measuring 5ft. Gin. were
cropped. In another field the oats grew to 7ft., and were of
excellent quality.

2. Trefoil grown in the same conditions measured 5ft. 3in.

3. Potatoes were grown under the same condition, the plants were
6ft. 3in. high, each plant carried 30 to 85 tubers, whose weight
varied from 1lb. loz. to 2lb. 20z. each, and they were of excep-
tional quality.

4. Vines that were badly attacked by Phyloxera were cured and
rejuvenated to such an extent that after three years treatment
by the apparatus they were heavily laden with enormous
bunches of very sweet grapes. (Here it may be mentioned

[PAG 24]
ELECTROCULTURE 23

that all grapes grown with the assistance of electroculture
are much sweeter and have a much richer flavour, besides
being richer in alcohol.)

5. Carrots grew to a length of 19 inches, beetroot to 18 inches
and nearly 17 inches in circumference, and tomatoes, French
beans, asparagus, artichokes, and celery grew proportionately.

6. As regards fruit trees, the results are truly astounding. An
old pear tree, so old that it hardly had any bark left on the
trunk and having but few leaves, produced an abundance of
pears as the result of electroculture, some weighing as much
as lb. each.

The above are only a few illustrations which go to show what
can be done without the use of manures.

The Christofieau apparatus not only captures the atmospheric
electricity, but also forms an association of the positive electricity
of the atmosphere with the magnetism of the earth, the telluric
currents.

The heat of the sun, the rain, the wind and even frost all come
together in turn to determine or form in the apparatus a function
which transforms itself into electricity. All! these combined actions
produce in plants an extraordinary vital energy. The apparatus
which makes its own electricity at no cost whatever, and will last for
a man’s lifetime.

Long before Mr. Christofleau, attempts of the same kind were
made, but the apparatus were very imperfect, and the cost was too
great for practical application.

The Christofleau apparatus is a magnetic mass which is placed
on a post, the steel point is turned toward the South, and the head
toward the North. The point captures the magnetism of the earth,
the electric currents, whilst the electricity of the air is captured
by the aerials which are on top of the apparatus and are pointed
skywards. By a distribution of ridges and flanges the sun, the cold,
the frost, the wind and the rain supply their contingent of electric
forces which is distributed to the soil by means of a galvanised
wire.

The many Parasites which attack plants are destroyed and the
beneficial effects of the electricity always travelling from the South
to North, from the chemical transformation which gives to vegetation
the necessary elements for its nourishment and development.

Once the apparatus is fixed there is no need to interfere with it,
and it remains there indefinitely, and the first expense has been
made once and for all time, and the cost of manuring is minimised,
for the soil contains it. The results will go on increasing, that is to
say, that the second year and the years following it will be better
than the first.

The ears of the crop will be larger and fuller, the leaves of
vegetables, fruit trees, vines and other vegetation will begin to be
thicker, larger, and greener, the fruit will be larger and more numer-
ous, the vegetables, such as potatoes, tomatoes, beans, ete., will be
much larger and more abundant.

But this is only the first result which goes on increasing until

[PAG 25]
24 ELECTROCULTURE

the fifth or sixth year when the soil, which is then much richer,
causes the vegetation to be more constant and more abundant and
richer in useful elements, such as starch, sugar and alcohol. . The
fruit is sweeter and the flavour is much more pronounced. There
can never be any failure, providing the apparatus is correctly pointing
toward the needle of the compass_that is, South-North._

We wish to overcome the scepticism and the. prejudice which
growers often manifest to new scientific processes, and we do not
anticipate much difficulty in demonstrating to them the many advan-
tages of Mr, Christofleau’s discovery. To the incredulous and the
timid growers we assure them that even a modest trial will convince
them of the extraordinary value of the feeble atmospheric and
magnetic currents to vegetation.

We simply ask them to make a trial of two to six apparatus
on their land, taking care to make the comparison alongside where
the apparatus has been placed, i.e., alongside. where the wire has
been buried. The result for the first year. will clearly and effectively
demonstrate the value of the method, and the increase of the yield
will largely repay for the expense of the trial. The next year,
pleased with the marvellous results the experimenters will become
fully convinced of the efficacy of the invention.

The atmospheric electricity captured by the Christofleau apparatus
accumulates in the soil until it is saturated with it. The first year
the overproduction repays largely, as stated before, for the cost
of the installation, and this increase goes on year by year until the
fifth or sixth year; from then on the crops, etc., will remain stationary
and of constant regularity as regards abundance and the exceptional
quality. The soil will have reached its maximum of capacity of pro-
duction and will remain at that. They attain a very high yield, often
up to 100 per cent. or more, in comparison with crops grown by the
aid of artificial manure.

The ravages of drought are greatly minimised, and we
will explain the reason why: As it is necessary to have water or
rain to decompose the fertilisers in the soil, and thus supply to the
plants the necessary current to their vitality, the Christofleau
apparatus supplies this current slowly, but continuously, and, there-
fore it supplements rain just as it supplements fertilisers, Likewise,
vegetation growing in soil which is electro-magnetic is immuned from
rotting by heavy rains, as the germs of rot cannot develop when in
contact with the electric currents. (N.B.—This should, therefore,
eliminate “rust” altogether.) It has been noticed that influenced
crops resist much more victoriously the effects of frost. The proof
of the accumulation of electricity in the soil was signalled to me by
a reputed electrician who, after reading my articles on electroculture,
applied electric currents of feeble intensity to an ailing aspidestras
by means of a weak electric current of only a few “milliamperes”
in the soil where the plant was. Five days after stopping the current
he noticed the soil had retained all the electricity he had introduced to
it, and the plant had become greener under the beneficial influence of
this phenomenon.

It has been pointed out to me that industrial electric currents
could produce the same results as the electricity which was captured

[PAG 26]
ELECTROCULTURE 25

The set of nine poles errected at Mr. C. E. Pope’s nursery,
St. Martins. On the top of each of these is placed one of the
Apparatus.

A close up view of the Apparatus.
4

[PAG 27]
26 ELECTROCULTURE

by the Christofteau apparatus. This comparison was made and the
advantage of atmospheric electricity was manifest: the industrial
currents not attaining the yield given by electro magnetic process.
Does it mean to say that the constitution and the quality of the fluid
are different in the atmospheric current and the industrial current?
No, certainly not. But there is a point on which we essentially and
immediately insist. It is on the extraordinary difference which exists
between the effects of the currents of a FEEBLE INTENSITY, but of
continuous application, and those of intense currents, but of limited
application. Experiments have been made by using currents of 110
volts during a limited time, and renewing the application every day.
Such electrification has never been able to show an increase of more
than between 25 per cent. to 30 ‘per cent. in comparison made with
comparative plots. With the Christsfleau process its beneficial effects
rebound not only on the general development of the plants them-
selves, but also, and especially so, cn the increase of the yield and on
the size and the exceptional quality of the cereals, vegetables, fruit,
tubers, vines, etc., which become richer in useful elements such as
starch, sugar, alcohol, etc., and increase in not merely 25 per cent.
to 30 per cent., but of 100 per cent. and 200 per cent., and often more.
To what can this crushing superiority in favour of the Christofleau
process be attributed? Undoubtedly to these three essential factors.

1. The feeble intensity of the current.
2. To its continuous application.

3. Certainly to its magnetic action which could not be supplied
by industrial electricity. All agriculturists know the beneficient effect
of a steady if even light rain as compared with heavy and short
showers of rain. The atmospheric current, the magnetic effluvium cost
nothing, nor do the currents supplied by the Christofleau apparatus,
w.iich are supplied by the sun, rain, clouds, wind and frost. There is
absolutely no doubt as to the beneficial effects of atmospheric elec-
tricity in vegetation. Several scientists have proved it. Abbe Nollett
in 1749, Abbe Berthollon in 1783, and a little later on Spechnoff, a
Russian scientist, demonstrated the influence of electricity on vegeta-
tion, and by means of his process Spechnoff showed an increase of
yield of 100 per cent. The idea was never abandoned, and if the pre-
decessors of Mr. Christofleau could not put their ideas into practice,
it was due to the fact that their apparatus were too complicated,
susceptible to change of temperature, of a high cost, and could not
be used economically. The success of the inventor, Mr. Christofleau,
is in having realised a maximum yield, to have accumulated in his
apparatus, besides the atmospheric current, the currents produced
by the sun, the rain, the clouds, the wind, and the frost, and to have
made an apparatus which is very strong, practicable, not susceptible
to the vagaries of the temperature, which will last for ever, and
which does not require any attention or maintaining. The proximity
of a wireless plant is no detriment to Electroculture, nor is it neces-
sary for the land to be treated to be flat, as it may be undulating, and
have several depressions. BUT ONE FACT IS VERY IMPORTANT,
AND THAT IS THAT THE WIRE BE DIRECTED DIRECTLY
NORTH BY THE COMPASS. The only detriment might be when

[PAG 28]
ELECTROCULTURE

Field of Potatoes grown by the Electroculture process.
Height, 6ft. 3in. Number of Tubers to each plant 30 to 35,
Weight of each Tuber from lib. loz. to 21h. 202.

27

[PAG 29]
< 28 ELECTROCULTURE
trees are within, say, 100 yards to the South of the apparatus, for the
reason that the electrical currents which invariably travel South to
North would be intercepted and would consequently interfere with
the efficiency of the apparatus. In such cases, though, the effect would
not be nullified; it would take a comparatively longer period to attain
its object. Any obstructions, such as trees or buildings, to the North,
however, would not influence the effect in any way.

Electroculture has been highly praised by many scientists, who
have given the inventor much encouragement, and to-day ranks as
one of the most important discoveries of the age.

G.B.

OPINION OF SCIENTISTS.

Extrect from the “Electro Revue,” of January, 1921. Article
Written and Signed by the Celebrated Electrician, Dr. Foreau
Be Courmelles.

“The idea of increasing the yield of agriculture by the use of
clectricity, that is to say, by employing this fluid to activate plant
growth, is not new.

“Some rather successful experiments were made in the eighteenth
century when science made great progress. The Abbes Nollet,
Bertholon and Sans made experiments during that century. I will
quote this passage of a conference which I made on the 28th of
February, 1893, at the annual fete of the Horticultural Society of
Picardie, at Amiens:—‘TIf the plant is neurasthenic, that is to say,
devoid of vigour, although it is not actually ailing, the electricity will
be of great benefit to it, just as it is to human beings,’

“An experiment was made on two identical fields, which were
planted with the same vegetation, by means of metallic chains which
traversed one of the fields and by which oxydised electric currents
were formed. The growth of the plants on the electrified field was
more considerable than on the other field. Knowing the happy
results I have obtained by the application of electricity to human
diseases, I was not astonished, therefore, at this result. To revert
back, therefore, to the method to be applied to ailing and neurasthenic
plants and human beings, the remedy is found, viz., the electrification
of morbid vegetation.

“Abbe Bertholon has demonstrated this cure a long time ago.
Many experiments with electricity have been made since the 18th
Century on vegetation, In this era when, due to under production, the
cost of living is so dear, any suggestion that will increase the yield
of our natural resources should be published, encouraged and put to
practical use. It is, therefore, pleasant for me to discuss the work
of one of the readers of the ‘Electro Revue,’ M. Justin Christofleau,

[PAG 30]
ELECTROCULTURE 29

.who knows and quotes the work of his predecessors, Abbes Nollet
and Bertholon, Abbe Nollet, who was the tutor of Louis XVI,
announced to the world that electricity contributed to THE EVA-
PORATION OF THE SOIL, it facilitated the germination of the
seeds and increased the ascending acceleration of the sap in vege-
tation.

“Abbe Bertholon, who also treated human diseases by means of
electricity, invented the ‘Electro-vegotometre,’ in order to test its
action on plant life. In 1900 Brother Paulin, the Director of the
Agriculutural Society of Beauvais, carried out some very successful
experiments at Montbrisson. Finally, M. Grandeau has established
the fact that the nitrification of the products of the soil through
vegetation was due to the atmospherie electricity.

“The nitrogenous products take from the floating air and from
the electric fluid, the elements of their transformations; this is unde-
niable, and is being used industrially to-day.

“Being well conversant with the above facts and by following the
laws of terrestrial magnetism, M. Justin Christofleau has invented
and put to practical use a very simple apparatus, which captures
the tellurie currents, those terrestrial currents which direct the
needle of the compass to indicate the North and the South. This
apparatus is placed on a wooden post 20ft. high (at least) and is
placed strictly as per the direction of the needle of the compass, the
boreal and austral parts carry the antennae North and South so
that the magnetic current travelling from North to South is captured
in its passage by the antennae of the apparatus. A galvanised wire
eonducts this electricity in the soil. The floating air which is
electrified, electrifies also the point of the antennae and this electricity
which follows the same course as the terrestrial current adds its action
in the depths of the soil. The result is excellent, and this is not
surprising and there is nothing left but to propagate the invention.
This double electricity has no limit, one can thus gather the terres-
trial and aerial fluids for miles and miles and double the production
without increasing manual labour.”

[PAG 31]
30 ELECTROCULTURE

A FEW STRAWBERRIES

HARICOT BEANS

Grown with Manure. Grown by Electroculture Process
without Manure.

[PAG 32]
ELECTROCULTURE 31
OFFICIAL REPORTS.

Experiments made at the Institution of Agriculture of Metz with
the Electroculture apparatus.

FRENCH REPUBLIC.

The Director of the Agriculture Station of Metz,
7 Metz, August 5th, 1921.
To M. J. Christofleau,—

In answer to your letter of July 26th, I have the honour to
enclose herewith the reports on the results of the trials made with
your apparatus by M. Sabatier, PRINCIPAL CHEMIST, at the
Station of Agriculture of Metz.

Please accept, Sir, my salutations.

(Signed) The Director of the Agriculture Station of Metz.

REPORT OF M. SABATIE.

Engineer of Agriculture and Chief Chemist at the Station of Agricul-
ture of Metz. Experiment of Electroculture with the Christofleau
Apparatus.

1. On Fruit Trees.