=== Electroculture (Christofleau Justin).pdf — CHUNK 3/3 ===
Chars: 6,460 | Offset: 89,415



In my experiments with your Electroculture machine I found
that wheat and oats were 75% better than on the plot not treated;
and the maize and millet were also improved to the same extent.
Other plants were about equal, but it must be taken into consideration
that the plots did not receive the work to produce good crops during
the hot and dry summer in this country. .

Yours faithfully,

O. A. TITLEY.

[PAG 60]
ELECTROCULYURE 59

REPORTS ON RESULTS OBTAINED ON MR. BURGESS’S
PROPERTY, BANANA GROWER, GYMPIE ROAD,
ASPLEY, QUEENSLAND.

We visited Mr. Burgess on the 4th January. Mr. Burgess has
one plant installed, which had been in operation for exactly two
(2) months at the date of our visit. Mr. Burgess is remarkably
emphatic on the very fine results obtained, even at this date.

He first pointed to a small plot of very poor soil indeed, which
had been built up from the refuse from a tannery. This is the first
year, for a period of four (4) years since even grass and weeds
have grown on this small plot of land. Immediately after the plant
was installed, and during extremely dry weather, Mr. Burgess, as
an experiment, planted out 18 tomato plants which were badly
infested with blight, at the same time planting a few check plants
cut of the electrified strip. The blight eventually killed these check
plants. In the electrified strip, however, the main stem rotted away
through the ravages of blight, but fresh roots were sent out from
the mother portion of the stem, which are now vigorous and healthy-
looking plants. Mr. Burgess states that this result is astounding,
and he cannot recall a plant ever recovering after being affected
with this disease. :

MELONS AND CUCUMBERS.—Mr. Burgess found that melons
and cucumbers germinated in the electrified strips between 4 and 5
days. In a check plot some distance away, melon and cucumber
seeds took 14 days to germinate. Mr. Burgess states that as far as
he can tell, the whole of the seeds in the electrified strip germinated,
whereas in the check plot the percentage of germination was poor.
He pointed out the very much greater and more vigorous growth
in the electrified strips.

BANANAS.—Mr. Burgess is a banana grower of many years
experience, and is a very methodic grower. In the electrified strip
he has ist, 2nd and 8rd year plants, and in the case of each plant
is able to point to a very marked increase in growth, and he main-
tains, in all cases, very much healthier plants. Mr. Burgess is
already convinced that his 2nd year bananas in the electrified strip
will carry a heavy crop, whereas in the soil he is working he is
getting no returns from 2nd year plants at present. He remarked
particularly on two very sickly plants which, under ordinary cir-
cumstances, a grower would pull out and not be bothered with,
which in the electrified strip have made really remarkable progress,
and within a period of two months picking up from being sickly
plants indeed to very fine, healthy and robust plants.

He started off feeling very sceptical of results, but he is now
convinced of the results of Electroculture, and he has placed an order
for a further 24 plants to be delivered at the rate of 2 per month.
He states that when he gets these in, if he can manage it, he will
keep on adding until he has electrified the whole of his property.

[PAG 61]
Price of the Apparatus

THE APPARATUS COSTS £6.
Packed free on Rail Perth.

CASH WITH ORDER—

Exchange to be added on Cheques.

ALEX. TROUCHET & SON
la Padbury’s Buildings, Forest Place,
Perth, Western Australia.
Sole Agents for Australia, New Zealand, Java, Straits Settlements,

Federated Malay States, Siam, India, Ceylon, Sumatra, Burma,
Demerara, and South Africa.

[PAG 62]
*“foLizy ygnos pue ‘ervroueq ‘vung ‘eazemumg

‘uojfap ‘EIpuz ‘WEI ‘seyeyg AEereni poyesepe,g ‘syuouTayyyeg SHEIIS ‘eave ‘pue[eoz MON ‘erquagsny 307 syuesy eds

“RITRAISNY WISI M ‘YIIIT

‘ofueyoxo Joy Moye aseajd onboy> Suipues USYN

*sqmsor
poo3 jo aszuerent
ay} st snyeredde ay

jO uorze[[e:sui 3991109
ayy 39310} Jou og

*SNOLLOAYIG

NOS 8% LAHONOUL XEIV

‘als Jo 3d19093 Jo SAP usados UIY}IM
(3431937 pues) spoo3 ay} 107 quowAed uy onbeyo preast0f
0} Put posinour JI aFELIIBO 107011 10 [ea Aed 0} 09188 I

tini “in aut 03 paubisuos *qo'f 40 “4 0f

pasanyap “Yyova 9% © snivunddp 24n7n904399]77

npajforstay) ** “ ATdd0S ASVHATd

‘soeT_ 38910] ‘STurpymg s,Ainqpeg BI

*sqmsaa

ay} Jexpinb ay} pue

‘pag 24 JeYysIY ayy

——punoi3 24} jo qa;
'H 0% LSVAT

LV 94 pmouys spenoy

“Peysiiqeyse
£pp9o31109 aq Yo pue
qnog = suona1p 34
quepiodun AiwA SI 3]

[PAG 63]
62 ELECTROCULTURE

ELECTROCULTURE

Grows every thing by Wireless.

THE MONEY-MAKER!
THE MONEY-SAVER!

A New Scientific Progress
applied to Vegetation

By which:

1—Crops of Grain, Fruit, ete., are increased 100 to 200 per
cent. and more.

2.—The Use and Expense of Fertilizers is eliminated.

3.--Vegetables and Fruit are better, taste better and are larger.

4,—Graps are sweeter, contain more alcohol, the cold weather
does not affect their growth, the sulphuring of Vines is
dispensed with. No more fear of mildew, phylloxera,
odium ete.

5.—Parasites, Diseases, and Insects are distroyed.

6.—Old Fruit-trees are rejuvenated and made to bear well again,

7.—Sheep and Cattle thrive better when fed on Fodder grown

’ by Electroculture.

8.—Manual Labour is economised.

9.—Crops are much hastened and your products will be sold at
an early market.

10.—Electroculture is especially suitable in drought-strieken
regions.

11—Electroculture supplies humidity to the soil, and therefore
it eliminates the necessity of rain as it eliminates the
necessity of Fertilizer. |

NOTE.—The Apparatus makes its own Electricity at no cost
at all. No Batteries Required.

ALEX.TROUCHET & SON
la Padbury’s Buildings, Forest Place,
Perth, Western Australia.
Sole Agents for Australia, New Zealand, Java, Strait Settlements,

Federated Malay States, Siam, India, Ceylon, Sumatra
Demerara, and South Africa.” » Burma,

[PAG 64]
Electrify Your - Seeds

WE MAKE A SPECIALITY OF
THE ELECTRIFICATION
QF SEEDS.

i Electrified seeds will germinate much more rapidly,
and the percentage of the germination itself will be

much greater.
ei 4
Plants po nite seeds will grow quicker,

will be more/robust, will resist frost better, and
their productivity will be much larger.

PARCEL OF SEEDS UP TO ONE OUNCE.
PRICE 10/- PER OUNCE.
DOUBLY ELECTRIFIED SEEDS, 20/- PER
OUNCE,

REDUCTIONS MADE FOR LARGE
QUANTITIES: