=== Electroculture (Christofleau Justin).pdf — CHUNK 2/3 ===
Chars: 44,724 | Offset: 44,691



We have observed a more intense vegetation by the action of
the apparatus on an ailing apricot tree. The disease was due to a
mushroom parasite which has completely disappeared, and during
the month of August we noticed numerous and very vigorous new
shoots. The fructification was forcibly mediocre for all the fruit
trees had been attacked by a black frost of 6 degrees when the trees
were in bloom.

2. On Vegetables.

A field of French Beans was divided in two parts. One was
submitted to the actions of the apparatus of electroculture, the
other served as the comparative plot, the manuring of the two parcels
was identical. Under the action of the Christofleau process the French
Beans resisted the dry weather; the growth always remained regular,
and one could notice a uniform growth on all the influenced parcel.
The comparative parcel could not resist the intense drought which
took place in the month of July. The stalks of the beans on that
parcel became completely yellow, and the crop was considerably
lessened. The parcel of land where the Christofieau apparatus were
installed produced THREE TIMES the crop of the comparative
parcel.

Those experiments merit the attention of the agriculturists,
arboriculturists, viticulturists and horticulturists. However, they
must be persevered with for two or three years on different cultures
in order to show their action on vegetation in general and on the
fructification of fruit trees in particular.

[PAG 33]
32 ELECTROCULTURE

OPINION OF THE PRESS.

Extract from the ‘‘Agriculture de Touraine’’ Newspaper,
26th May, 1921.

AN IMMENSE PROGRESS IN AGRICULTURE
—ELECTROCULTURE.

The work of scientists and the experience acquired by them as
the years go on has demonstrated that when a calamity affects man-
kind, Nature comes to the aid of humanity with some natural help
or other in order to combat this calamity.

The frightful cataclysm which has recently swept all over the
world has had a long sequence of very unfortunate consequences, and
amongst those unfortunate consequences there is one which is parti-
cularly grave, as it affects millions of individuals who are crushed,
so to speak, by its enormous weight.

This consequence is THE HIGH COST OF LIVING. It is neces-
sary, therefore, to combat this evil. Many divers means have been
suggested and so far, the results have been exceedingly meagre. There
is only one way of remedying this evil, THE, INTENSIFICATION
OF THE PRODUCTION OF THOSE THINGS THAT ARE NECES-
SARY TO LIFE.

The problem, therefore, is this: TO INCREASE THE PRO-
DUCTION OF THE SOIL, THUS LESSENING THE COST
OF IMPORTATION, WHICH CRIPPLES THE RETURNS OF
AGRICULTURISTS.

THE SOLUTION IS FOUND IN ELECTROCULTURE.

IN ELECTROCULTURE.

Electroculture is an old science. For centuries past scientists
had discovered that this mysterious force of electricity was connected
to the life of men, of animals, and of plants, and having noted its
effects on animated bodies, have applied it to the benefit of vege-
tation. Many inventors have applied electricity to the development of
plants and they have all obtained impressive and conclusive results.
It was, therefore, a long established fact that electricity influenced the
life of plants and developed them, but no one had found the means
and ways of applying this principle in a practical manner until one
of our compatriots, an indefatigable searcher (who during the grave
period of the war rendered many services to the National Defence)
after many years of experimental work and trials has so effectively

[PAG 34]
ELECTROCULTURE 33

White Haricots from Spain, Grown July, 1926—9ft. High

[PAG 35]
34 ELECTROCULTURE

PEAS 71 to 9ft. High, Grown June 1926,

[PAG 36]
ELECTROCULTURE 35

solved this difficulty by the surprising results he has obtained that
he has patented a system of electroculture which is to agriculture
what wireless telegraphy is to the aerial telegraphy of Chappe.

Electroculture is born, and agriculture owes its genial application
to M. Justin Christofieau. IN THE FUTURE THE NÉED OF CHEMI.
CAL MANURES TO FERTILISE OUR LAND WILL BE GREATLY
MINIMISED. Hitherto, all the inventors had put forth different sys-
tems which were no doubt efficacious, but were inapplicable as they
were too complicated. M. Christofleau has invented a small and simple
apparatus which, placed at one end of a field captures the atmospheric
currents which it combines with the telluric currents, which coming in
contact are carried by a galvanised wire to the soil wherein they
deposit their beneficial effects, whereby they multiply in an incredible
manner the quantity and quality of the crops.

October 10th, 1926. “The Brisbane Daily Mail.”
WORLD FAMINE:
Crop Shrinkage.

London, Tuesday.—Sir Daniel Hall, Chief Scientific Adviser and
Director-General of the Intelligence Dept. of the Ministry of Agri-
culture, speaking before the British Association, foreshadowed the
spectre of a great famine when the world’s wheat fields were unable
to feed the multiplying peoples.

Sir Daniel said the good land was already short, necessitating
dairy farming alternately with agriculture in Australia and South
Africa. The world’s wheat-eating population was increasing by
5,000,000 a year, necessitating the finding of 12,000,000 acres of
additional land, whereas, on the contrary, there had been a shrinkage
in acreage of many crops since the war.

The white peoples might be forced to teetotalism and vegetarian-
ism, but the races omitting meat and alcohol in order to multiply
themselves were the permanent slave types, designed to function like
worker bees.

agriculture had lost its best brains owing to the small returns
yielded.

The flight from the land to the city was progressing everywhere.
Over-population and unemployment were terrible realities, AND
MANKIND’S ONLY HOPE WAS SCIENTIFICALLY INTENSI-
FYING THE CULTIVATION OF EXISTING LAND.

Extract from the ‘‘Homme Libre’’.Newspaper 20th February,
1921.
Article written by M. Fernand Hure.

“If some one said to us: ‘There is no more need of coal, of petrol,
no need of lubricating oil to help the functioning of machinery in the
factories; no more need of fertilisers for culture,’ we would be inclined
to think it a miracle. It is nevertheless ‘a reality. At the village of
La Queue-les-Yvelines, near the forest of Rambouillet we have seen
M. Christofleau, an indefatigable worker belonging to this very
rare elite, who works quietly and silently.

“M. Christofieau (who has also invented an aerial turbine capable
of obviating the use of charcoal and which he presented to the French
Government during the war), working on the laws of the terrestrial
magnetism has invented an apparatus which captures the electricity of
the air and spreads it in the soil where it contributes to the formation
of nitrogenous products.

“His apparatus, which has been patented all over the world under

[PAG 37]
36 ELECTROCUL'TURE

the name of ‘Electro-magnetic-terro Celestial,’ is extremely simple,
and its effect on vegetation is really marvellous. The cereals, vege-
tables, vines, fruit trees, grow with an extraordinary vigour by assimi-
lating rapidly the nutritive substances of the soil. This means we
are on the eve of a total revolution of our present methods of culture.

“Abbe Morcux, the Director of ihe Observatory of Bourges states
that the apparatus will impart cxtraordinary yields to the plants
that are submitted to its influence.

“The precious electric fiuid can be used for miles and miles,
forming practically an immense magnetic network within whick
the malevolent microbes and parasites perish,

“Vines treated by M. Christofleau’s process are immune from
phyloxera and mildew.

“Is this not, therefore, a source of inestimable riches for agricul-
ture? M. Christofleau has fulfilled his duty to mankind. We humbly
fulfil ours by calling attention to his work.”

Extract from ‘‘La Revue du Ciel.’’ Newspaper Article Written
by Abbe Moreux.

“This problem is not new and amongst the experiments that have
has been made to solve it, I must quote Abbe Nollet, who was the
first to notice the infiuence of electricity on vegetation. In 178%
Abbe Bertholon noted the action of atmospheric electricity on vege-
tation in one of his works, but made a practical application of it by
the aid of the ‘Electro-vegetometre.’

“About 1900 Brother Paulin, Director of the Agriculture Institute
of Beauvais, made successful experiments at Montbrisson, which
created a great sensation. More recently still, M. Grandeau, the
Agricultural Scientist has established the fact that electricity had a
notable influence on the nitrification of the products of the soil
through vegetation.

“Following upon the above stated experiments M. Christofleau
who is also the inventor of an aerial turbine of a capacity of 15,000
horse-power, has invented an apparatus which he has named the
‘Electro-magnetic-terro Celestrial,’ which captures the electricity of
the air in order to spread it in the soil where it contributes to the
formation of nitrogenous products, It is of great importance to
direct the apparatus SOUTH-NORTH, the steel pointer towards the
SOUTH and the subterranean wire towards the NORTH. It is suffi-
cient for the subterranean wire to be placed in the soil about two
inches below the passage of the plough. The posts on which the
apparatus is secured must be placed at a distance of 10ft.

“For some time now the use of M, Christofleau’s apparatus has
greatly developed, and it appears that everyone praises the invention
which gives to the vegetation subjected to the influence of electricity
thus captured, EXTRAORDINARY YIELDS. Our readers who are
interested in agriculture will be grateful to us for having attracted
their attention to this.”

[PAG 38]
ELECTROCULTURE 37

List of Newspapers that have Favourably Commented on the
Christofleau Agriculture Process,

“La Nature,” 28th March, 1921.
“La Bonhomme Normand,” lst April, 1921.
“La Belgique Productrice,” 1st April, 1921.
“Le Sud Marocain,” 7th April, 1921.
“La Vallee d’Aoste,” 9th April, 1921.
“Le Paysan de France,” 10th April, 1921.
“Le Revue Economique de Tours,” 16th April, 1921.
“La Defence Agricole de la Bance et du Perche,” June 4th, 1921.
“L’Union Catholique de Rodez,” 16th August, 1921.
“Le Radical de Paris,” Tth September, 1921.
“La Demoeratie Nouvelle,” 30th July, 1922,
“Le Pionnier,” June, 1922.
“Le Chasseur Francais,” February 22nd, 1928.
“L'Electricien,” 15th April, 1928.
“Le Magasin Pittoresque,” 15th April, 1923,
“Le Paysan de l’Youne,” 15th May, 1923.
“La Revue Mondiale,” 15th May, 1923.
“Le Petit Inventeur,” 12th June, 1928.
“L’Aube Nouvelle,” 30th June, 192%.
“Le Soir de Bruxelles,” 15th June, 1923.
“Le Pionnier,” January, 1928.
“Almanach du Petit Parisien,” June, 1924.
“L’Homme Libre,” 23rd and 27th July, 1924.
“L’Excelsior,” July, 1924.
“The Times” (Paris edition), 3rd August, 1924.
“Le Fermier,” 11th August and 30th October, 1924.
“L’Independent de Rambouillet,” 15th August, 1924.
“L’Industrie Naturelle Belge,” 21st August, 1924.
“L’Almanach du Petit haut Marnais,” 1925.
“L’Oeuvre,” 2nd March, 1924.
“Le Petit Parisien,’ 2nd November, 1924.
“L’Intransigeant,” 3rd November, 1924 and 1st February, 1925.
“Berlin Tageblatt,” 16th November, 1924.
“Le Matin d’Auvers,” 20th November, 1924 and 28th December,
1924, .

“The World Magazine,” 22nd March, 1925,

“Lokal Auzeiger,” 8th April, 1925.

“Der Blitz,” 2ist May, 1925.

“Le Revue Mondiale,” 15th July, 1925.

The Popular Science Magazine, June, 1925.

» Primary Producers’ News, Sydney, January, 21, 1927.
» Primary Producer, Perth, February 10, 1927.

» Sunday Times, Perth, June 13, 20, 27, 1926,

» Truth Newspaper, Perth, July 16, 1927.

» West Australian, Perth, July 7, 1927.

» Mirror, Perth, July 23, 1927. .

» Otago Daily Times, New Zealand, April, 1927.
» Timaru Herald, New Zealand, April, 1927.
» Lyttleton Press, New Zealand, March 5, 1927.
” orld’s News, Sydney, January 15, 1927.

»» Recorder, South Australia, December 11, 1926.

[PAG 39]
38 ELECTROCULTURE

MISCELLANEOUS NOTES.

Instead of alternate crops in the wheat centres where the rain-
fall is small, fallowing must be carried on every second year. While
the soil is resting, the apparatus is never idle, but is constantly depos-
iting electricity and fertilising matter into the soil, and it still goes
on with its work the following year while the crop is growing, thus
functioning perpetually, After three years, crops can be cropped
every year, providing the soil is allowed to rest for one year every
fifth or sixth year. >

It is evident there is not one man living to-day who can explain
why electricity makes the plants grow, because we are here con-
fronted with the great mystery of life—we can only notice the effects
which electricity has upon vegetation. The plants are stronger, more
healthy, more vigorous, more green; the crops yield more, the ears
are bigger and fuller, vegetables and fruit larger, more hastened,
more numerous. As for the chemical transformations which take
place in the soil by the action of electricity, we must, as far as science
is concerned in its present state, content ourselves to note the benefi-
cial results and to profit thereby. If some day this mystery is
explained so much the better.

1. By the reason of the changes of the electricity of the air with
the electricity of the earth, they create vibrations which small
insects cannot resist.

2. The plants assimilating the electricity are much more vigorous
and will, later on, when the soil becomes more impregnated
with electricity, resist more victoriously all the diseases and
parasites that may attack them.

Germany has offered in vain 12 million franes. for the world’s
right of Mr. Christofleau’s apparatus.

When joining the ends of the wire it is advisable to splice them
very tightly for about 15 or 16 inches, and to solder the ends so as to
ensure no leakage.

The higher the post is above the ground, the better will be the
results,

With the help of the agriculturists a new era of prosperity is
rapidly approaching, and will shortly extend right through the Com-
monwealth,

Everything grown by electroculture is more healthful to human
consumption and to the general health of the public.

[PAG 40]
ELECTROCULTURE

A BEAUTIFUL CROP OF WHEAT.

[PAG 41]
40 ELECTROCULTURE

CABBAGE.

Measuring 11 feet in circumference.

[PAG 42]
ELECTROCULTURE 41

The wise and progressive agriculturist will readily recognise the
virtues of the electroculture process, and will not waste any time in
installing the apparatus.

Anything grown by the electroculture process is hastened, and
consequently will have the benefit of an early market.

When a piece of land is to be electrified, the operation is very
simple. By means of a compass, directions South-North are correctly
established; this is most important, as the land magnetism travels
South-North. The ‘apparatus is then set with the pointer direct
South, so as to capture the telluric currents, and the wire placed in
the faro direct North, thus capturing the land magnetism (earth
currents).

The apparatus will influence a strip of land 14ft. wide, East and
West, and an unlimited distance from South to North.

The grower must not be disappointed if the whole 14ft. of the
strip is not electrified the first year. The influence will gradually
spread year by year, as more electricity has accumulated in the soil.

The plants assimilating electricity are much more vigorous, and
will thereby, later on, when the soil becomes more impregnated, resist
the frost and many diseases, which may attack them, much more
victoriously.

The Christofleau process is the only process known combining
the telluric currents (land magnetism) with the positive electricity
of the atmosphere.

The underground wire may be carried for miles and miles in a
due North direction from one property to another.

There are many different kinds of Electroculture dealing with
industrial electricity, which is imparted into the soil in large quan-
tities, usually of 110 volts for four continuous hours. Then the
current is turned off and renewed the next day. Experiments have
shown, if this intensity of industrial electricity were ‘imparted into
soil for longer ‘than four hours, it would burn and destroy the
vegetation.

From an agriculturist’s point of view, Mr. Christofleau compares
this process to a heavy shower of rain of short duration. After
many years of research work in his laboratory, he has succeeded, by
means of his apparatus, to capture the positive electricity from the
atmosphere, to drain it, and to impart it into the soil in a feeble
but continuous manner, which he compares to a slight shower of rain
of long duration.

Industrial processes have never been known to show more than
35 per cent. increase in production.

The almost incredible yield obtained by the Christofleau process
is due to the feeble current of atmospheric electricity which is im-
parted into the soil, together with its combination of the terrestrial
magnetism,

[PAG 43]
42 ELECTROCULTURE

The wire from the apparatus in the furrow may be carried
up hill and down dale, providing the line is still direct North; it can
be carried over a creek or river exposed, and the wire again buried
on the other side and carried on in the furrow as before.

In the case of a small drain, the wire may be carried through
a small earthenware pipe.

As the soil becomes more impregnated with the richness which
the apparatus imparts into it, the crops go on increasing during the
first, second, third and fourth years; between the fifth and sixth year
the soil will have reached its maximum capacity of production, and
the crops will remain at their highest, and will not decrease so long
as the apparatus is not removed.

The grower is recommended to use manure for the first year, as
if the apparatus were not there. It is optional for the grower to use
manure or not the second year. After the second year, it is not
necessary to use any further manures. The first results will be seen
by the foliage, which attains a much darker green, and the leaves
will become larger and thicker, due to the larger quantity of nitro-
genous products which are imparted into the soil.

The atmospheric electricity runs in stratas or separate layers in
the air, each on a different piane, one above the other. The higher
the layers from the ground, the greater is the voltage therein. These
currents, which are positive currents, are continually passing back-
wards and forwards in their own particular plane.

The perpendicular pointer and the aerial wires of the apparatus
serve as a conductor to pass this positive atmospheric current to
the negative current in the ground. It is obvious to see that the
higher the post on which the apparatus is placed the more electricity
is captured.

Everything grown by electricity is more healthful for human
consumption. .

With the help of agriculturists, a new era of prosperity is rapidly
approaching, and will shortly extend right throughout Australasia,
and eventually through the whole world.

It is recommended to paint the post on which the apparatus is
placed, to preserve the wood, care being taken that no paint is to be
put on the apparatus itself or the wire.

[PAG 44]
ELECTROCULTURE 43

Showing method of fixing dropper wire to main wires when
using an overhead wire on vines.—page 14.

[SENN Mn OO

When joining the ends of the wires it is essential to twist the
wires very tightly for about 16 inches; and to solder the end
points.—page 44,

[PAG 45]
44 ELECTROCULTURE
POINTS TO REMEMBER

Should you be doubtful on some points please do not hesitate,
Your questions will be fully replied to in due course by your local
Agent.

The apparatus can be installed at any time, the sooner the better.
Electroculture will RAPIDLY SWEETEN AND REJUVENATE land
which has been rendered sour by constant cultivation, and will keep
the soil well acrated,

It is unwise to wait until the crop is sown before installing the
apparatus. The longer it has been erected the more electricity will
have been imparted into the soil.

Between the fifth and the sixth years the soil will have reached
its maximum capacity of production and will always remain at that.
The apparatus must not be removed.

The grower must not be disappointed if the whole of the 14ft.
strip is not electrified the first year. The influence will gradually
spread year by year as more electricity accumulates in the soil.

When joining the ends of the wires it is essential to splice the
wires very tightly for about 16in., and to solder the end points.

The electroculture process of M. Christofieau has a really mar-
vellous effect on flowers. The blooms are considerably increased, and
are of a remarkable size; the perfume is much more pronounced, and
the foliage attains a much richer verdure.

In any commercial undertaking the object is to obtain the maxi-
mum of results with the minimum of labour and expense. Please
bear in mind that this objective will be attained by using M. Christo-
fleau’s electroculture process.

When agriculturists become more acquainted with the influence
of electricity on culture and vegetation they will realise its manifold
and immense advantages.

The results obtained in the first year the apparatus has been
installed, will remove this veil of doubt which obscures the minds of
the sceptics and the timid. At the end of the second year, when the
results will be still more manifest, the agriculturist will realise that
electroculture has marked the dawn of a new era in agriculture.

[PAG 46]
ELECTROCULTURE 45

TESTIMONIALS.

Experiment Made by M. Roger Claret on his Property at
Fleury d’Aube (Aube).

(Testimony of the Usher of the Municipality).

In the year 1922 on the 16th of September, I, J. Boyer, Usher of
the Civil Tribunal of Narbonne, and there residing, at the request
of M. Roger Claret, proprietor at Fleury d’Aube, who has certified to
me:—That on the 1st April, 1922 he has installed in one of his vine-
yards at the place called “Les Pres,” 28 apparatus of electroculture
invented by M. Christofleau. That as a result of the influence of
those apparatus the crops that are actually on the electrified land
are very beautiful, and he requested me to visit his property before
the removal of the said crops, to note:—1, the results obtained by the
use of those apparatus; 2, to note the difference of the crops with
the comparative plots which were of the same soil, the same variety
of vines, and which were planted at the same time.

I, J. Boyer, in deference to this request visited the said property
and have noted:—1, That on a part of this very large property planted
with vines, M. Claret has installed 28 apparatus invented by M.
Christofieau; 2, The vegetation is superb, the shoots are very long,
large and abundant, the leaves are very green, large and well deve-
loped; 8, The crop on the electrified land is very large; on numerous
vines I have counted 35 bunches of large grapes, the berries were
very close and very long; 4, This crop is very regular and superior
to that of the comparative plots which had been manured. The elec-
trified land had not been manured; 5, Nine hundred and twenty-four
vines of the electrified land which were cropped in my presence have
produced 100 “comportes”* of grapes and the 2,274 plants would have
produced more than 300 comportes; 6, In the other comparative
plots of land that were not submitted to the action of the said appara-
tus, M. Claret has declared that 2,000 vines had produced 199 com-
portes of grapes.

It will be seen that the yield of the land which was submitted
to the electro-magnetic treatment was superior to the comparative
land. M. Claret stated that the comportes had been made up and
pressed by the same person and in the same manner,

And of all as above stated I have herewith signed this declaration.

(Signed) J. BOYER, Usher, Narbonne.
*A “comporte” is a small wooden tub used for carrying the
vintage.

[PAG 47]
46

ELECTROCULTURE

Trefoil electrified by the Electroculture process, Cropped
in 1923. Height, 5ft. 3in.

[PAG 48]
ELECTROCULTURE

An old Pear Tree laden with fruit. This tree is so old
that before being rejuvenated by the Electroculture*

process it barely carried a few leaves.

47

[PAG 49]
48 ELECTROCULTURE

Oakdale, via Camden,
4th January, 1927.
Tylors (Australia) Limited,
18 Bridge Street,
SYDNEY.
Dear Sirs,— .

I am writing this letter to tell you of the most satisfactory
results that I have had from two Christofleau’s Electroculture
Apparatus. Twelve months ago on a strip of land on which hitherto
I had never been able to grow passion fruit successfully and, as I
planted passion fruit again, you can see I put the apparatus to a
severe test. I planted comparative rows of vines alongside on good
land and manured these rows well. The first difference I noticed
was the healthy green leaves which appeared on the electrified vines,
and also the increased growth, although we had hardly any rain and
then only in the winter which is no good to passion vines. Now
after 12 months the difference is most marked. The electrified rows
of vines are not only healthier with bigger and greener leaves, but
the number of fruit is at least double that on the non-electrified rows
and the fruit is much bigger.

I am looking forward to even better results from now on, since
we have had such good rain. I am sure that these good results are
due to the influence of the apparatus. I know that people are
sceptical, and I was laughed at here when I first put mine up, but
now I have visitors from all parts, and I feel sure that I convince
them all before they leave my farm that Electroculture is no joke.

I have written to Mr. Christofieau of my success, and I shall
shortly be able to order more apparatus from you and I know that
Electroculture is doing for my crop all that your pamphlet claims
it should,

Wishing you every success.

Your faithfully,
(Sgd.) HARRY LOVELL.

Steere Street, COLLIE,
11/1/'27.
To Mr, Alex. Trouchet.
Dear Sir,—

Having erected one of Mr. Christofleau’s Electroculture Apparatus
I am pleased to state that I have had very pleasing results. I can
safely say that I have gained over three weeks in the ripening of
my tomatoes which I planted on ground treated by the Apparatus.
The fruit are ripening evenly and are large and of excellent flavour.

I have also noted that I had a Beach tree and nectarine tree
which for three years have been in a deplorable state with curl-leaf,
and since installing the Apparatus it has disappeared entirely. I
can put it down to no other agency than Electroculture; I have never
sprayed or manured the trees since they were put in. The Apparatus
was installed in July, 1926. I have also noted very beneficial results
from seedlings of tomatoes and lettuce planted under the influence
of the Apparatus. I am quite satisfied from results on comparative
plants that are practically on the same class of ground that in two
separate crops of tomatoes the result has been identical and those
under the influence are far bigger and altogether a superior class of
ruit.

I have had a talk to Mr. Bevan, of Allanson, and he is also
very pleased with the results of a crop of peas which he put in, and
although it was in hungry sand he used super for manure, and he
said that he was astonished at the growth and productivity of the
crop which was influenced by the wire. A comparative plant with the

[PAG 50]
ELECTROCULTURE 49

same manure, on the same class of hungry soil, did not give anything
like the crop treated by Electroculture. Mr. Bevan intends to write
to you shortly, and you will no doubt be pleased to receive his letter.
I visited a Mr. J. Sykes, of Allanson, and he showed me some vines
where he had installed one of the Apparatus, and although his vines
were put in at the same time, two years, there is wonderful growth
on the vines near where the Apparatus wire is buried. With one or
two exceptions none of the vines further away from the wire are
within feet of them for length of wood.

Wishing you the best of luck.

Yours sincerely,
JOHN McCAUGHAN,

WITNESS:

H. Whiteaker, Justice of Peace,

Collie, W.A.

Jan. 11th, 1927.

La Queue-les-Yvelines,
20th July, 1923.

I, the undersigned, G. Etoc, municipal councillor, produce mer-
chant at La Queue-les-Yvelines, do hereby declare that for the last
five years, I have purchased each year the crop of cats grown on a
very small field belonging to M. J. Christofieau. The production of
this small field has increased every year, and this crop which
was only of from 120 to 150 bundles has increased this year to 275
bundles, plus 25 bundles which were kept by M. Christofieau, yield-
ing therefore a total of 800 bundles. The oats were of splendid
quality. The crops were thus doubled since M. Christofleau has

lived on that property. (Signed) G. ETOC.
— (Signe a ,

Witness to M. Etoc’s signature: .
A. JOULAIN.
(Seal of the Municipality).

Montfort L’Amaury,
27th September, 1923.

M. Christofleau,—

Although the three apparatus I have purchased from you were not
installed until the end of March (only six months) I am pleased to
inform you the results have been good. I have never had so many
artichokes, some of which were very large. I have had big crops
of tomatoes, and the caulifiowers and the salad were very large.
My fruit trees seem more vigorous and cause me to hope that next
year the results will be even more satisfactory.

—(Signed) A. GROUSSIN,
President of the Horticultural Society of Montfort.

[PAG 51]
50 ELECTROCULTURE

Application to Culture,

Note.—Should a neighbour wish to share the cost of the installation, the wirc can easily be

extended into his property.

[PAG 52]
ELECTROCULTURE 51

“Riverside,” 30 Cook Street,
NEDLANDS, W.A.

To. Mr. Trouchet,

PERTH.

Dear Sir,— .

With reference to Electroculture, of which I see you have the
agency.

In 1914 when in France with the Expeditionary Force we were
halted close to a farm or what appeared to be a farm consisting of
house, orchard and large vegetable gardens. As we had eaten nothing
but hard tack and Bully Beef for several days, our Major, Lord
George Stewart Murray, decided to procure some fruit if possible,
and with that intention he took five of us up through the
to the house. As we entered the gardens we were astounded to see
tomato plants of enormous size heavily laden with fruit. When we
met the gentleman of the house he showed us round, and appeared
to be remarkably proud of his produce. He pointed out to us a fig
tree that grew in gravel, no carth whatever near the roots. This
fact we noticed ourselves. We did not understand the conversation
between the Major and Mr. Christofleau, as he afterwards turned
out to be, as they were talking in French. We came away eventually
with a quantity of beautiful fruit, and this was distributed to the
Company. While eating it, practically every man remarked on its
beauty, not only in size, but in sweetness and flavour. Later in the
day our Major (I regret to say he was killed a few days later)
told us that the fruit we had eaten was grown by an invention of the
grower. It appeared that he fertilized his ground by electricity
derived from the air, and used no manure whatever. .

It seems to me that what we saw so many years ago is at lasi
coming into general use.

I am sure that if only prospective users had seen what we
saw, they would jump at the system. .

I hope you will excuse the liberty I take in writing to you, but
I felt that as I have written to the “Sunday Times” and told the
Editor of the before mentioned, I would do the ~ame to you.

If you would be so kind I would very mue.. like to see this
instrument if you could spare the time to show and explain it to me.

Hoping the above interests you.

Ia
"Fours faithfully,
(Sgd.)  J. FAIRWEATHER,
Late Sgt. Black Watch.

Box 30, Dowerin, W.A.,
13/6/'27.
Messrs. A. Trouchet & Son,
Forrest Place,
Perth.
Dear S

irs,—
Your note to hand re electrified seeds you sent to me after
putting through the Electroculture process. I have very much
pleasure in ing you that I am very pleased with the results.

The seeds came up well: every one must have germinated. They
are now planted out, and are growing well.
. Yours truly, .

(Signed) E. E. McHUGH.

Doodlakine, W.A.

16/6/727.

[PAG 53]
52

ELECTROCULTURE

Oats cropped in 1922 in a field without fertilisers and
without irrigation, but influenced by the Electroculture

apparatus.

[PAG 54]
ELECTROCULTURE 53

OAKDALE, via CAMDEN, N.S.W.,
4th January, 1927.
Tylors (Australia) Ltd.,
13 Bridge Street,
SYDNEY.
Dear Sirs,

I am writing this letter to tell you of the most satisfactory results
that I have had from two Christofleau’s Electroculture Apparatus
installed by me on my orchard. I installed the apparatus 12 months
ago on a strip of land on which hitherto I had never been able to
grow passion vines successfully, and as I planted passion fruit again,
you can see I put the apparatus to a severe test. I planted com-
parative rows of vines alongside on good land, and manured these
rows well. The first difference I noticed was the healthy green leaves
which appeared on the electrified vines, and also the increased growth,
although we had hardly any rain, and then only in the winter, which
is no good to passion vines. Now, after 12 months, the difference is
most marked. The electrified rows of vines are not only healthier,
with bigger and greener leaves, but the number of fruit is at least
double that on the non-electrified rows, and the fruit is much biggen

I am looking forward to even better results from now on, since
we have had such good rain. I am sure that these results are due
to the influence of the apparatus. I know that people are sceptical,
and I was laughed at here when I first put mine up, but now I have
visitors from all parts, and I feel sure that I convince them all
before they leave my farm that Electroculture is no joke.

1 have written to Mr. Christofleau of my success, and I shall
shortly be able to order more apparatus from you, and I know that
Electroculture is doing for my crop all that your pamphlet claims it
should.

Wishing you every success.

Yours faithfully,
(Sgd.) HARRY LOVELL.

22 Molloy Street, Bunbury, W.A.,
28rd May, 1927.
Mr. Trouchet,
Padbury’s Buildings,
PERTH.
Dear Sir,

Your letter to hand a few days ago re our Electroculture process.
First of all, I must tell you that Mrs. Illingsworth has gone on a
long trip to Europe; she left here last April and I think she will be
in England about the middle of June. She does not expect to get
back for 12 months.

Well, about those machines we have; I myself think they are
wonderful, as we have used no manures at all, and our vegetables
have been simply wonderful, also dahlias. The flavour in the peas
and beans was simply beautiful, also lettuce. We also had a won-
derful lot of rock melons and jam melons.

We are using carrots now that were planted about 9 weeks ago,
so one cannot complain about that.

Thanking you,

Yours faithfully,
L. ILLINGSWORTH,
Per Miss Higgie.

[PAG 55]
ULTURE

‘

ELBCTROC

54

“ST

asvd— so pue 188% Soruuna sour, SUIXI] jo poypyy
1s

[PAG 56]
ELECTROCULTURE 55

Perth, W.A.,
March 25, 1927.
Messrs. A. Trouchet & Son,
PERTH.

Re Electroculture.
Dear Sirs,—

In reference to experiments carried out by me in my Mt. Barker
orchard, I am pleased to say these were highly satisfactory.

I erected the apparatus and carried the wire underground, at a
depth of 15 inches, through the orchard, for 10 chains, and then on
through two small paddocks, for about 8 chains further, for the
purpose of experimenting with crops other than the apples.

I erected the apparatus on November 10th, 1926, and on the
26th of the same month I planted plots of Canadian Wonder Beans
and Yorkshire Hero Peas along the wire and check plots 20 feet on
one side of the wire, giving them the same quantity of manures,
viz., Super 6 parts, Nitrate Soda 1 pet Potash 1 part. Ten weeks
after planting, I took samples from the beans, and the result was that
the beans on the wire yielded 6 times the weight of the check plot
from the same number of plants. The peas also yielded more than
double. In both cases, this was due to their coming to maturity so
much earlier.

The influence of the Electroculture on the apples was very
marked. The Jonathan and Cleopatra being quite two weeks in
advance of the trees in the adjacent rows.

Having sold my orchard to Mr. T. Hawley, in February, I had
only three months to carry out these experiments, but from what
I sam, I am quite convinced that Electroculture will be beneficial
to crops.

The one thing I did want to test was whether the apparatus
would cure the Bitter-pit in the Cleopatra apple; but-unfortunately I
left before they had reached maturity, and did not have a chance of
seeing the final result. Still, next year would be the best time to
test this, and I hope that Mr. Hawley or Mr. Young will-watch this
closely for me.

As soon as I am again settled, I shall be pleased to carry out
experiments for you where you will have an opportunity of seeing
the apparatus thoroughly tested.

I am, yours faithtally
. J. VAN ZUILECOM.

Tolanthe Streets
Bassendean, W.A.,
9/6/27.
Messrs. A. Trouchet & Son,
Forrest Place,
Perth.
Dear Sirs,—

Re yours of 7th inst. Three sets of tomato seeds were set, two
about a fortnight before those treated by you.

The electrified seeds came up much better than the others, and
were the only ones to stand the frosts of the last two nights.

I will let you know later on what sort of a crop I get from
same, and when I am in a position to do so, I will purchase one of

tus.
your OPE Yours faithfully,
(Signed) D. GORDON.

[PAG 57]
56 ELECTROCULTURE

Hack
GOSNELLS,
February 28, 1927.
To Messrs. A. Trouchet & Son,
PERTH.

Dear Sirs,— ‘l

Re Electroculture. It may interest you to know that the Electro-
culture apparatus installed by my son, appears to be working satis-
factorily. The past winter being an exceptionally wet one, snowing
plants of all description naturally suffered, especially in waterlo;
ground. Citrus trees, and other plants coming under the infiuence
of the Electroculture apparatus, appeared to withstand the wet better
than those not coming within radius of its influence.

Tomato plants, doing exceptionally well.

To get a quicker result, I think the wire should be nearer the
surface (not nearly two feet deep), as we have got ours.

Green Jarrah poles are inclined to twist towards the sun, but
not sufficiently to make much difference.

Your representative, Mr. Wood, and others, have seen, and were
able to compare difference, at a most unfavourable time.

At present we have not much under cultivation, as my son being
busy in other directions has not the time to complete a few alterations
to our garden, in order to get the full benefit of the Electroculture

apparatus.
Yours faithfully,
CHAS. H. STAGG.
P.S.—To confirm the above statement, my.mandarines sent to
market last season realised 14/- per case, against the published
prices in the “West Australian,” viz., about 11/-.

C.H.S.
Witness this statement,
February 23rd, 1927.
W. F. GUPPY, J.P.,
President of the Justices’ Association
of Western Australia.
Hack Street,

GOSNELLS,

: 24th February, 1927.
Messrs. A. Trouchet & Son,

PERTH. i
Dear Sirs,

In a previous statement I suggested that surface crops would
benefit by the apparatus being placed nearer the surface. Our sub-
sequent experience, by growth of Peas, Beans, Lettuce and Tomatoes,
have done exceptionally weli during the drier period.

Observance justifies the above more particularly without the
application of artificial watering. :

Yours faithfully,

A
. CHAS. H. STAGG.
Witness this statement, .
24th February, 1927.
W. F. GUPPY, J.P.,
President of the Justices’ Association
of Western Australia.

[PAG 58]
ELETROCULTURE 5T

Steere Street
COLLIE, W.A.,
llth January, 1927.
Mr. Alex. Trouchet,
PERTH.

Dear Sir,

Having erected one of Mr. Christofleau’s Electroculture apparatus,
I am pleased to state that I have had very pleasing results. I can
safely say that I have gained over three weeks in the ripening of
my tomatoes, which I planted on ground treated by the apparatus.
The fruit are ripening evenly, are large, and of excellent flavour.

I have also noted that I had a peach tree and a nectarine tree
which, for three years, have been in a deplorable state with curl
leaf, and since installing the apparatus it has disappeared entirely.
I can put it down to no other agency than Electroculture. I have
never sprayed or manured the trees since they were put in. The
apparatus was installed in July, 1926. . .

I have also noted v beneficial results from seedlings of
tomatoes and lettuce planted under the influence of the a; tus.
I.am ite satisfied from results on comparative plots that are
practically on the same class of und, that in two separate crops
of tomatoes the result has been identical, and those under the in-
fluence are far bigger and altogether a superior class of fruit.

I have had a talk to Mr. Bevan, of Allanson, and he also is
very pleased with the results of a crop of peas which he put in,
and although it was in hungry sand, he used super for manure, and
he said that he was astonished at the growth and productivity of
the crop, which was influenced by the wire; the comparative plot,
with the same manure, on the same class of hungry soil, did not
give anything like the crop treated by Electroculture. Mr. Bevan
‘intends to write to you shortly, and you will, no doubt, be pleased
to receive his letter. :

I visited Mr. J. Sykes, of Allanson, and he showed me some
vines where he had installed one of the apparatus, and although his
vines were put in at the same time, two years, there is wonderful

th on the vines near where the wire from the apparatus is
Buried with one or two exceptions; none of the vines further away
from_the wire are within feet of them for length of wood.

Wishing you the best of luck, incerel

ours 8:
. JOHN MeCAUGHAN.
Witness,

H. WHITAKER, J.P., Collie, Jan. 11th, 1927.

“Marbro,” New Norcia, W.A.,
18/6/'27.
Messrs. A. Trouchet & Son,
Forrest Place,

_ Perth.”
Dear Sirs,—

In reply to yours of 16th inst., the seeds you electrified for me
a short time ago have given good results so far.

I had the misfortune of most of the seeds being spoilt, as they
were scratched by the fowls. The seeds which were left seemed
to grow ‘wonderfully, as nearly every seed germinated.

. Some of the seeds gave poor results last year, but since they
were electrified, they germinated and grew rapidi; , although the
ground was not at its best.

Yours faithfully,
(Signed): H. HALLIGAN.

[PAG 59]
68 ELECTROCULTURE

Devon Road,
BASSENDEAN, W.A.,
5th January, 1927.
Messrs. A. Trouchet & Son,
Padbury’s Buildings,
PERTH.

Dear Sirs,

I purchased an Electroculture apparatus from you last November
to try a setting of eggs with. You advised me the machine should
be down two or three months to be effective. I found it would be
too late to get a broody hen. I had one that persisted in sitting in a
place with little or no shade until she became sick.

The apparatus had been erected three weeks, so I gave it a trial;
the chickens were due out, according to your booklet, on Sunday
night at 10.30 p.m. Monday morning we broke an egg and found a
chicken in it; Tuesday afternoon the chicks were out and well. I
tried the remaining three and found them infertile. The chicks are
strong in spite of the hot weather, and the hen has quite recovered
without any special attention. This makes it a day and a half
earlier than the usual time, which would be Wednesday night or
Thursday morning. I consider this very satisfactory, and hope to
get the full results in the proper season.

I might state that I have erected this apparatus near a fig tree
which has lost its leaves for the last two years when the fruit is
ripening, so I am now watching this with interest.

Trusting this will be of interest to you.

Yours faithfully,
THOS. A. WOOD.
Witness this statement,
January 17th, 1927.
W. F. GUPPY, J.P.,
President of the Justices’ Association of Western Australia,

Messrs. A. Trouchet & Son,
Forrest Place,
Perth.

Dear Sirs,—

I have much pleasure in replying to your letter of the 7th inst.
regarding my electrified seeds. They are doing splendidly. They
are better than. any flower seeds I have ever yet grown.

As a rule, I have trouble in getting my flower seeds to grow,
but these came up in no time, and have grown rapidly ever since.

Yours truly,
(Signed) M. CUOLAHAN.

BRUNSWICK JUNCTION, W.A.,
May 30th, 1927.
Messrs. A. Trouchet & Son,
PERTH.

Dear Sirs, .