=== Tertium Organum (P. D. Ouspensky).pdf — CHUNK 4/18 ===
Chars: 44,849 | Offset: 133,673

es - vital 
energy, or even soul. This something will be regarded as unknowable for a 
two-dimensional being, since it is the result of an incomprehensible motion of 
incomprehensible bodies. 
If we imagine a stationary circle lying on the plane, for a two-dimensional 
being this circle will appear as a moving line, possessing very strange and 
incomprehensible motion. 
The plane being will never see this motion. He may possibly call it 
molecular motion, i.e. the movement of minute, invisible particles of 'matter'. 
For a two-dimensional being, a circle rotating round a central axis will, in 
some incomprehensible way, appear different from a stationary circle. Both 
will seem to be moving, but moving differently.

[PAG 60]
Owing to its double movement, a circle or a square lying on the plane and 
rotating round its centre, will be, for a two-dimensional being, an
incomprehensible and unmeasurable phenomenon, somewhat similar to the 
phenomenon of life for the modern physicist. 
Thus, for a two-dimensional being, a straight line will be motionless 
matter; an irregular line or a curve will be matter in motion; and a moving
line will be living matter. 
The centre of a circle or a square will be inaccessible to the plane being,
just as the centre of a sphere or a cube made of solid matter is inaccessible to 
us. Moreover, the two-dimensional being will be incapable of even 
understanding about a centre, since he will have no idea of what a centre 
means. 
It has already been said that, having no conception of any phenomena 
occurring outside the plane, i.e. outside his space, the plane being will regard
all phenomena as taking place on his plane. And all these phenomena, 
supposedly taking place on his plane, he will regard as being in causal 
interdependence one with another, that is, he will think that one phenomenon 
is the effect of another which has also taken place there - on his plane - and 
the cause of a third which will take place there also. 
If a multi-coloured cube passes through the plane, the whole cube and its 
motion will be perceived by the plane being as changes in the colour of the 
lines lying on the surface. So, if a blue line replaces a red one, the plane being
will regard the red line as a past event. He will be unable to conceive of the 
red line still existing somewhere. He will say that the line is the same but that 
it has become blue owing to certain causes of a physical nature. If the cube 
starts moving backwards and the red line again replaces the blue line, it will 
be a new phenomenon for the plane being. He will say that the line has 
become red again. 
Everything situated above and below, if the plane is horizontal, or to the 
right and left if the plane is vertical, will lie in time for a being living on that 
plane, that is, it will be in the past and the future. Everything that exists in 
reality outside the plane will be regarded as non-existent: either as already in 
the past, i.e. as something that has vanished, ceased to be, something that will 
never return; or in the future, i.e. as something not yet existing, not 
manifested but merely potential. 
Let us imagine a wheel with multi-coloured spokes rotating through the plane 
on which lives a two-dimensional being. The movement of the spokes will 
appear to a two-dimensional being as changes in the colour of a line lying on
the surface. The plane being will call these

[PAG 61]
changes phenomena and, observing these phenomena, he will notice a certain sequence 
in them. He will know that the black line is followed by a white one, the white by a 
blue, the blue by a pink. If something else is connected with the appearance of the 
white line - the ringing of a bell for instance - the two-dimensional being will say that 
the white line is the cause of the ringing. The changing colour of the lines will, in the 
opinion of the two-dimensional being, depend on some causes to be found there, on his 
plane. Any conjecture as to the possible existence of causes lying outside the plane he 
will dismiss as utterly fantastic and absolutely unscientific. And this will be so because 
he himself will never be able to visualize the wheel, i.e. the different parts of the wheel 
on each side of the plane. Having studied the changes in the colour of the lines and 
learnt their order, the plane being, on seeing one of them - say, the blue one - will think 
that the black and the white have already passed, i.e. have vanished, have ceased to 
exist, have receded into the past; whereas the lines which have not yet appeared -the 
yellow, the green and so on, and among them the new white and the new black which 
are to come - do not yet exist but lie in the future. 
Thus, although not conscious of the form of his universe and regarding it as infinite 
in all directions, the plane being will involuntarily think of the past as lying somewhere 
on one side of everything, and of the future as lying somewhere on the other side of 
everything. This is how the two-dimensional being arrives at the idea of time. We see 
that this idea arises from the fact that, out of three dimensions of space, the two­
dimensional being is aware of only two; the third dimension he senses only through its 
effects on the plane; therefore he regards it as something distinct from the first two 
dimensions of space, and calls it time. 
Now let us imagine two wheels with multi-coloured spokes rotating through the plane 
on which the two-dimensional being lives, and rotating in opposite directions. The 
spokes of one of them come from above and go below; the spokes of the other come 
from below and go above. 
The plane being will never notice this. 
He will never notice that in the direction in which for one line, visible to him, lies 
the past, for the other line lies the future. This thought will never even occur to him, 
because he will have a very nebulous idea of both the past and the future, and will 
regard them only as concepts, and not as concrete facts. At the same time he will be 
firmly convinced that the past proceeds in one direction and the future in another. For 
him it will seem a wild absurdity that on one side

[PAG 62]
something past and something future may lie together, and on another side, 
also together, something future and something past. No less absurd will be 
the idea that some phenomena appear from where others disappear and vice 
versa. He will persist in thinking that the future is that from which everything 
comes and the past is that to which everything goes, and from which nothing 
returns. The plane being will be incapable of understanding that phenomena 
may proceed from the past as well as from the future. 
Thus we see that the plane being will have a very naive view of the 
changing colour of the line lying on the surface. The appearance of different 
spokes he will regard as changes in the colour of one and the same line, and, 
for him, the recurring appearance of a spoke of the same colour will be, each 
time, a new appearance of the given colour. 
Yet, having noticed a certain periodicity in the changes of the colour of the 
lines on the surface, having memorized the order of their appearance and 
learned to determine the 'time' of the appearance of certain spokes in relation 
to some other more permanent phenomenon, the plane being will be able to 
foretell the change of the line from one colour to another. 
Then he will say that he has studied this phenomenon, i.e. that he can 
apply to it the 'mathematical method' - can 'calculate it'. 
If we enter the world of the plane being, he will sense only the lines 
bounding the sections of our bodies. These sections, which will be living
beings for him, will appear from nowhere, change for no apparent reason, 
and disappear somewhere in a miraculous manner. The sections of all our 
inanimate but moving objects will also be independent living beings for him. 
If the consciousness of a plane being could have the faintest suspicion of 
our existence or enter into any kind of communication with our 
consciousness, we would be for him higher, omniscient, maybe omnipotent 
and, above all, unknowable beings of a totally incomprehensible category. 
We would see his world as it is and not as it appears to him. We would see 
the past and the future; we would be able to foretell, direct and even create 
events. 
We would know the essence of things. We would know what 'matter' (a 
straight line) is, what 'motion' (a curve, an irregular line, an angle) is. We 
would see the angle and see the centre. And this would give us an enormous 
advantage over a two-dimensional being. 
In all the phenomena of the two-dimensional world we would see

[PAG 63]
much more than the plane being does, or would see something quite different from 
what he sees. 
We would be able to tell him many new, unexpected and striking things about the 
phenomena of his world - if he could hear and understand us. 
First of all, we would be able to tell him that what he regards as phenomena, such as 
angles and curves, are the properties of higher bodies; that other 'phenomena' of his 
world are not phenomena at all but only parts or 'sections' of phenomena; that what he 
calls 'bodies' are only sections of bodies - and many other things besides. 
We could tell him that on both sides of his plane (i.e. his space or his ether) there 
lies an infinite space (which the plane being calls time), and in that space lie not only 
the causes of all his 'phenomena' but the phenomena themselves, either of the past or 
the future. And we could add that a 'phenomenon' is not just something that happens 
and then ceases to be, but is a combination of the properties of higher bodies. 
Nevertheless, we would find it very difficult to explain anything to a plane being, 
and he would find it very difficult to understand us. Above all, it would be difficult 
because he would have no concepts corresponding to our concepts. The necessary 
'words' would be lacking. 
For instance, section would be a completely new and incomprehensible word for 
him. Then, angle -
again an incomprehensible word. Centre -
still more 
incomprehensible. The third perpendicular -something unfathomable, lying outside his 
geometry. 
The most difficult thing for the plane being to understand would be the error of his 
idea of time. He would never be able to imagine that what has passed and what is to 
come exist simultaneously on lines at right angles to his plane. He could never 
understand that the past is identical with the future, since phenomena can both come 
and go from either side. 
But the most difficult thing of all for the plane being to understand would be that 
'time' contains two ideas: the idea of space and the idea of motion in this space. 
We have pointed out already that that which a two-dimensional being living on a plane 
calls motion, would bear quite a different aspect for us. 
In his book, The Fourth Dimension, under the title 'The First Chapter in the History 
of Four Space' Hinton writes:

[PAG 64]
Parmenides, and the Asiatic thinkers with whom he is in close affinity, propound a 
theory of existence which is in close accord with a conception of a possible relation 
between a higher and a lower dimensional space. This theory ... is one which in all 
ages has had a strong attraction for pure intellect, and is the natural mode of thought 
for those who refrain from projecting their own volition into nature under the guise of 
causality. 
According to Parmenides of the school of Elea the all is one, unmoving and 
unchanging. The permanent amid the transient - that foothold for thought, that solid 
ground for feeling on the discovery of which depends all our life - is no phantom; it 
is the image amidst deception of true being, the eternal, the unmoved, the one. Thus 
says Parmenides. 
But how to explain the shifting scene, these mutations of things! 
'Illusion', answers Parmenides. Distinguishing between truth and error, he tells of 
the true doctrine of the one — the false opinion of a changing world. He is no less 
memorable for the manner of his advocacy than for the cause he advocates. . . . 
Can the mind conceive a more delightful intellectual picture than that of 
Parmenides, pointing to the one, the true, the unchanging, and yet on the other hand 
ready to discuss all manner of false opinion? . . . 
In support of the true opinion he proceeded by the negative way of showing the 
self-contradictions in the ideas of change and motion. ... To express his doctrine in 
the ponderous modern way we must make the statement that motion is phenomenal, 
not real. 
Let us represent his doctrine. 
Imagine a sheet of still water into which a slanting stick is being lowered with a 
motion vertically downwards. Let 1, 2, 3 (Figure 1), be three consecutive positions of 
the stick. A, B, C, will be three consecutive positions of the meeting of the stick, with 
the surface of the water. As the stick passes down, the meeting will move from A on 
to B and C. 
Suppose now all the water to be removed except a film. At the meeting of the film 
and the stick there will be an interruption of the film. If we suppose the film to have a 
property, like that of a soap bubble, of closing up round any penetrating object, then 
as the stick goes vertically downwards the interruption in the film will move on. 
If we pass a spiral through the film the intersection will give a point moving in a 
circle shown by the dotted lines in the figure (Figure 2).* 
For the plane being such a point, moving in a circle on its surface will probably be a 
cosmic phenomenon in the nature of the motion of a planet in its orbit. 
Suppose now the spiral to be still and the film to move vertically upwards, the 
circular motion of the point will continue until this motion stops. 
If instead of one spiral we take a complicated structure of spirals, inclined lines, 
straight lines, irregular lines and curves, then, with 
* C. H. Hinton, The Fourth Dimension, London, 1912, reprinted Arno Press, New 
York, 1976, pp. 23, 24, 25.

[PAG 65]
Relation of two- to three-dimensional perception 
Figure 1
 Figure 2 
the movement of the film upwards, we shall have in the film a whole world of moving 
points, whose movements will appear independent to the plane being. 
The plane being will naturally explain these movements as dependent upon one 
another, and the fictitious nature of this movement and its dependence on spirals and 
other lines lying outside his space will never occur to him. 
If we examine the relationship of the plane being to the three-dimensional world we 
shall see that the two-dimensional plane being would find it very difficult to 
understand all the complexity of the phenomena of our world, as it appears to us. The 
plane being is accustomed to represent to himself too simple a world. 
Taking sections of bodies for bodies, the plane being would compare them only as 
regards their length and their greater or lesser curvature, i.e. for him their greater or 
lesser speed of motion. Such differences as exist for us between the things of our 
world, could not exist for him. The functions of the objects of our world would be 
utterly beyond his understanding; they would be incomprehensible, 'supernatural'. 
Imagine a coin and a candle, both of the same diameter, placed on the plane on 
which the two-dimensional being lives. For the plane being these would be two equal 
circles, i.e. two moving lines, absolutely identical; he would never discover any 
difference between them. The functions which the coin and the candle have in our 
world would be for him entirely terra incognita. If we try to imagine what a 
tremendous evolution the plane being would have to undergo in order to understand 
the functions of the coin and the candle and the difference between these functions, we 
should understand what it is that divides the plane world from the three-dimensional 
world.

[PAG 66]
Before anything else, they are divided because of the utter impossibility - on 
a plane - of even imagining anything like the three-dimensional world with 
all the variety of its functions. 
The properties of the phenomena of the plane world will be extremely 
monotonous; phenomena will be distinguished by the order of their 
appearance, their duration, their periodicity. Bodies and objects of this world 
will be flat and uniform, like shadows, i.e. like the shadows of completely
different objects, which seem to us alike. Even if the consciousness of a 
plane being could enter into communication with our consciousness, he 
would still be unable ever to understand all the variety and richness of 
phenomena of our world and the variety of functions of our objects. 
Plane beings would be unable to grasp any of our most ordinary concepts. 
It would be very difficult for them to understand that phenomena which are 
the same for them are actually different and that, on the other hand, 
phenomena which are quite separate for them are actually parts of one big
phenomenon, or even parts of one object or one being. 
This last would be one of the most difficult things for the plane being to 
understand. If we suppose our two-dimensional being to live on a horizontal 
plane, intersecting the top of a tree, but parallel to the earth, then for him the 
sections of branches will appear each as a completely independent
phenomenon or object. The idea of a tree with its branches can never even 
occur to him. 
Altogether, to understand even the most fundamental and simple things of 
our world will be, for the plane being, an infinitely long and difficult process. 
He will have to remodel his ideas of space and time. This must be the first 
step. Nothing can be achieved until this is done. So long as the plane being
visualizes all our universe in time, i.e. refers to time everything that lies on 
both sides of his plane, he will never understand anything. In order to begin 
to understand the 'third dimension', the two-dimensional being living on the 
plane must visualize all his time-concepts spatially, i.e. translate his time into 
space. 
To achieve even an inkling of a right conception of our world, he must 
completely reconstruct all his ideas of the world - revalue all his values, re­
examine all his concepts; he must disunite all those concepts which unify and 
bring together those which disconnect and, above all, he must create an 
infinite number of new concepts. 
If we place five fingertips on the plane of the two-dimensional being, this 
will represent for him five separate phenomena.

[PAG 67]
Let us try to imagine the enormous mental evolution the plane being must undergo 
to understand that the five separate phenomena on his plane are the fingertips of the 
hand of a large, active and intelligent being - man. 
It would be extremely interesting to follow, step by step, the road the plane being 
must travel to come to the understanding of our world which, for him, lies in the region 
of the mysterious third dimension, i.e. partly in the past, partly in the future. In order to 
comprehend the three-dimensional world, the plane being must, first of all, cease to be 
two-dimensional, i.e. he must himself become three-dimensional; in other words, he 
must enter into the life interests of a three-dimensional space. If he feels the interests of 
that life he will, by this very fact, draw away from his own plane and will never be able 
to return there. Entering more and more into the orbit of ideas and concepts which 
previously were totally incomprehensible for him, he will no longer be a two­
dimensional being, but will become a three-dimensional one. But for this the plane 
being must really be three-dimensional, i.e. without being aware of it, he must possess 
a third dimension. A really two-dimensional being will never become three­
dimensional. In order to become three-dimensional, he must be three-dimensional. 
Then, in the end, he will be able to get free from the illusion of the two-dimensionality 
of the world and of himself, and feel the three-dimensional world.

[PAG 68]
CHAPTER 7  
Impossibility of a mathematical definition of dimensions. Why does mathematics not 
feel dimensions? The entirely conventional character of the designation of dimensions 
by powers. The possibility of representing all the powers on a line. Kant and 
Lobachevsky. The difference between non-Euclidean geometry and metageometry. 
Where should we seek the explanation of the three-dimensionality of the world, if 
Kant's ideas are correct? Are not the three-dimensional conditions of the world to be 
found in our perceiving apparatus, in our mind? 
Now that we have examined the 'relations which our space itself bears within 
it' we must return to the question: what really are the dimensions of space
and why are there three of them? 
What must strike us as most strange is the fact that it is impossible to 
define three-dimensionality mathematically. 
We are not clear about this, and it seems a paradox to us, because we 
always speak of measuring space; nevertheless, it is a fact that mathematics 
does not feel the dimensions of space. 
The question arises, how can such a fine instrument of analysis as 
mathematics is, not feel dimensions if they constitute certain real properties 
of space? 
In speaking of mathematics, it is necessary, first of all, to accept as a 
fundamental premise that/or every mathematical expression there is a 
corresponding relation of certain realities. 
If this is absent, if this is not so - then there is no mathematics. Expressing
the relations of magnitudes is the task of mathematics; 
this is its main essence, its chief content. But relations must be between 
something. It should always be possible to substitute some reality for the 
algebraical a, b and c. This is the ABC of all mathematics; a, b and c are 
banknotes: they may be genuine, if they have something real behind them, or 
they may be counterfeit, if behind them there is no reality.
'Dimensions' play here a very curious role. If we designate them by the 
algebraic symbols, a, b and c, these symbols will have the character of 
counterfeit banknotes: they cannot be replaced by any real magnitudes 
capable of expressing the relations of dimensions. 
Usually, dimensions are designated by powers - the first, the

[PAG 69]
second, the third. That is to say, if a line is called a, then the square, the sides 
of which are equal to this line will be a2, and the cube, the sides of which are 
equal to this square, will be a3. 
As a matter of fact this is what provided Hinton with a basis for his theory
of tessaracts, or four-dimensional solids - a4. But this is sheer fantasy,
because, in the first place, the designation of dimensions by powers is purely 
conventional. All powers may be represented on a line. Let us take a 5­
millimetre segment of the line a. Then a 25-millimetre segment will be its 
square, or a2; and a 125-millimetre segment will be its cube, or a3. 
How are we to understand that mathematics does not feel dimensions, i.e. 
that the difference between dimensions cannot be expressed mathematically? 
It can be understood and explained in one way only, namely, by the fact 
that this difference does not exist. 
Of course we know that all the three dimensions are actually identical, i.e. 
that each of the three dimensions in its turn may be regarded as the first, the 
second, the third, or vice versa. This by itself proves clearly that dimensions 
are not mathematical magnitudes. All the real properties of a thing can be 
expressed mathematically as magnitudes, i.e. as numbers showing the 
relation of these properties to other properties. 
In the question of dimensions, however, mathematics seems to see more, or 
farther, than we do; certain boundaries which stop us do not seem to hinder 
mathematics from looking through them and seeing that there are no realities 
to correspond to our concepts of dimensions. 
If the three dimensions really corresponded to the three powers, we should 
have the right to say that only three powers refer to geometry, and that all the 
other relations between higher powers, beginning from the fourth, lie beyond 
geometry.
But we have not even got the right to say that. The designation of 
dimensions by powers is absolutely conventional. 
Or, it would be more correct to say that, from the point of view of 
mathematics, geometry is an artificial construction for the purpose of solving 
problems based on conditional data, probably deduced from the 
characteristics of our mentality.
Hinton calls the system of investigation of 'higher space', meta-geometry, 
and he connects the names of Lobachevsky, Gauss and other investigators of 
non-Euclidean geometry with metageometry.
Let us now examine how the theories of these scientists stand in relation to 
the questions we have raised. 
Hinton deduces his ideas from Kant and Lobachevsky.

[PAG 70]
Others, on the contrary, set Kant's ideas in opposition to those of 
Lobachevsky. Thus, Roberto Bonola, in Non-Euclidean Geometry, says that 
Lobachevsky's view of space is opposed to that of Kant. He says: 
The Kantian doctrine considered space as a subjective intuition, a necessary 
presupposition of every experience. Lobachevsky's doctrine was rather allied to 
sensualism and the current empiricism, and compelled geometry to take its place 
again among the experimental sciences!* 
Which view is correct and in what relation do Lobachevsky's ideas stand to 
our problem? The most correct answer would be: in no relation. Non-
Euclidean geometry is not metageometry, and non-Euclidean geometry stands 
to metageometry in the same relation as does Euclidean geometry.
The results of all non-Euclidean geometry, which revalued the fundamental 
axioms of Euclid and found its fullest expression in the works of Bolyai, 
Gauss and Lobachevsky, are expressed in the formula: 
The axioms of a given geometry express the properties of a given 
space. 
Thus, plane geometry accepts all three Euclidean axioms, i.e.: 
1 A straight line is the shortest distance between two points. 
2 Any figure may be transferred to another place without interfering with 
its properties.
3 Parallel lines do not meet. (This last axiom is usually formulated 
differently according to Euclid.) 
In the geometry of a sphere or a concave surface only the first two axioms 
are true, for the meridians, parallel at the equator, meet at the poles.
In the geometry of an irregularly curved surface only the first axiom is true; 
the second (about the transfer of figures) no longer holds good, for a figure
taken from one place of an irregular surface may change when transferred to 
another place. And the sum of the angles of a triangle may be more or less 
than two right angles. 
Thus, axioms express the difference in the properties of different kinds of 
surfaces. A geometric axiom is a law of a given surface. 
* Roberto Bonola, Non-euclidean Geometry, a Critical and Historical Study of its 
Development, Open Court Publishing Co., Chicago, 1912, pp. 92 and 93.

[PAG 71]
But what is a surface? 
Lobachevsky's merit lies in the fact that he found it necessary to revise the 
fundamental concepts of geometry. But he never went so far as to revalue 
them from Kant's point of view. Yet at the same time, he never argued 
against Kant in any sense. For Lobachevsky, as a geometrician, a surface was 
merely a means for the generalization of certain properties upon which one or 
another geometric system was built, or the means for generalizing the 
properties of certain given lines. He probably never thought at all about the 
reality or the unreality of a surface. 
Thus, on the one hand, Bonola is quite wrong in ascribing to Lobachevsky
views opposed to those of Kant, and approaching 'sensualism' and 'the current 
empiricism'; while on the other hand, there are grounds for thinking that 
Hinton is quite subjective in ascribing to Lobachevsky and Gauss the 
inauguration of a new era in philosophy. 
Non-Euclidean geometry, including Lobachevsky's geometry, bears no 
relation to metageometry. 
Lobachevsky does not go outside the sphere of three dimensions. 
Metageometry regards the sphere of three dimensions as a section of higher 
space. Among the mathematicians, Riemann came closest of all to this idea, 
for he understood the relation of time to space. 
A point of three-dimensional space is a section of a metageometrical line. 
The lines metageometry deals with cannot be generalized on any surface. 
This last may be of the greatest importance for the definition of the difference 
between geometry (both Euclidean and non-Euclidean) and metageometry.
Metageometrical lines cannot be regarded as distances between points in our 
space; neither can we imagine them as forming any figures in our space. 
The examination of the possible properties of lines lying outside our space, 
their angles, and the relations of these lines and angles to the lines, angles, 
surfaces and solids of our geometry constitutes the subject of metageometry.
Students of non-Euclidean geometry could not bring themselves to 
relinquish the surface. There is something really tragic in this. See what 
surfaces Lobachevsky invented in his investigations of the 11th Euclidean 
postulate (about parallel lines, or about angles formed by a line intersecting 
two parallel lines). One of his surfaces resembles the surface of the blades of 
a ventilator;* another, the inner surface of a funnel. Yet he could not bring
himself to abandon the 
* Roberto Bonola, Non-Euclidean Geometry.

[PAG 72]
surface completely, to cast it away once and for all, and imagine that a line need not 
necessarily be on a surface, i.e. that a series of lines, parallel or almost parallel, cannot 
be generalized on any surface, not even in three-dimensional space. This explains why, 
in creating non-Euclidean geometry, he, and a great many other geometricians, were 
unable to get out of the three-dimensional world. 
Mechanics recognize a line in time, i.e. a line which cannot in any possible way be 
visualized on a surface, or as the distance between two points in space. This line is 
taken into account in calculations dealing with machinery. But geometry never had 
anything to do with this line, but always only with its sections. 
Now we may return to the question, 'what is space?' and see whether an answer to this 
question has been found. 
An exact definition and explanation of the three-dimensionality of space as a 
phenomenon of the world would be an answer. 
But there is no such answer. As an objective phenomenon, the three-dimensionality 
of space remains as mysterious and incomprehensible as before. In relation to three­
dimensionality it is necessary: 
either to accept it as a datum and add this datum to the two data we established before; 
or to admit the incorrectness of this whole objective method of reasoning and return to 
the other method, indicated at the outset. 
Then, starting from the two fundamental data - the world and consciousness — it 
will be necessary to establish whether three-dimensional space is a property of the 
world or a property of our perception of the world. 
Having started with Kant, who asserts that space is the property of the perception of 
the world by our consciousness, I purposely turned away from this idea and considered 
space as a property of the world. 
With Hinton, I admitted the surmise that our space bears within itself the conditions 
which allow us to establish its relations to higher space, and on the basis of this surmise 
I built a whole series of analogies which made clear to us certain things about the 
questions of space and time and their mutual relations. But, as has already been said, 
they did not explain anything concerning the main question of the causes of the three­
dimensionality of space. 
The method of analogies is, on the whole, rather disheartening. It makes one walk in 
a vicious circle. It helps to clear some things, but does not really give a straight answer 
to anything. After numerous and prolonged attempts to find one's way in complex 
problems with the help of analogies, one begins to feel the uselessness of all one's

[PAG 73]
efforts; one feels that, with these analogies, one is merely walking alongside 
a wall - and then, with a feeling of complete hatred and disgust for analogies, 
one begins to see the necessity for seeking some direct way which will lead 
straight to where one needs to go. 
This problem of higher dimensions has usually been tackled by means of 
analogies. Only very recently has science begun to work out that direct 
method which will be detailed later on. 
So, if we wish to follow the direct road, without deviating from it, we must 
rigidly adhere to Kant's fundamental propositions. But if we formulate 
Hinton's thought from the point of view of these propositions, we shall get 
the following result: we bear in ourselves the conditions of our space and 
therefore must find in ourselves the conditions which will enable us to 
establish the relation between our space and higher space.
In other words, it is in our mentality, in our perceiving apparatus, that we 
must find the conditions of the world's three-dimensionality. And it is also 
there that we must discover the conditions of the possibility of a higher­
dimensional world. 
If we set ourselves this task, we shall find we are on the direct road, and we 
should be able to get an answer to our question; what is space and its three­
dimensionality? 
How are we to approach the solution of this problem? 
Quite clearly, through the study of our consciousness and its properties. 
We shall be free of all analogies and start on the right and direct road towards 
the solution of the main problem of the subjective or objective character of 
space, if we decide to examine the mental forms in which we perceive the 
world, and see whether there is a correspondence between them and the 
three-dimensional extension of the world. In other words, we must see 
whether this idea of the three-dimensional extension of the world with its 
properties is not the outcome of certain properties of our own mentality.

[PAG 74]
CHAPTER 8  
Our perceiving apparatus. Sensation. Representation. Concept. Art as the language of 
the future. To what extent does the three-dimensionality of the world depend on the 
properties of our perceiving apparatus? What could prove this dependence? Where 
could we find a real confirmation of this dependence? Psychology of animals. In what 
does it differ from the human? Reflex. Irritability of the cell. Instinct. Pleasure - pain. 
Emotional thinking. Absence of concepts. Language of animals. Logic of animals. 
Different levels of intelligence in animals. The goose, the cat, the dog and the 
monkey. 
In order to find out the exact relation of our inner life to the outer world and to define 
what in our perception of the world belongs to the world and what belongs to ourselves, 
we must turn to elementary psychology and examine the mechanism of our perceiving 
apparatus. 
The basic unit of our perception is a sensation. A sensation is an elementary change 
in the state of our inner life, produced, or so it appears to us, either by some change in 
the state of the outer world in relation to our inner life, or by a change in our inner life 
in relation to the outer world. So physics and psycho-physics teach us. I shall not deal 
here with the question of the correctness or incorrectness of the interpretations 
advanced by these sciences. It is sufficient to define a sensation as an elementary 
change in the state of the inner life, i.e. as the element, or the basic unit of this change. 
Experiencing a sensation, we assume it to be, so to speak, a reflection of some kind of 
change in the external world. 
The sensations experienced by us leave a certain trace in our memory. In 
accumulating, memories of sensations begin to blend in our consciousness into groups 
according to their similarity, to become associated, to be put together, or to be 
contrasted. Sensations, usually experienced in close connection with one another, will 
arise in our memory preserving the same connection. And gradually, out of memories of 
sensations there are formed representations. Representations are, so to speak, group 
memories of sensations. In the formation of representations, the grouping of sensations 
follows two clearly denned directions. The first direction is according to the character 
of the sensations: thus sensations of yellow colour will be linked with

[PAG 75]
other sensations of yellow colour, sensations of acid taste, with other 
sensations of acid taste. The second direction is according to the time of 
receiving the sensation. When one group, forming one representation, 
contains different sensations experienced simultaneously, the memory of this 
definite group of sensations is attributed to a common cause. The 'common 
cause' is projected into the external world, as the object; and it is assumed that 
the given representation reflects the real properties of this object. Such a 
group memory constitutes a representation, as, for instance, the representation 
of a tree - this tree. Into this group enters the green colour of the leaves, their 
smell, their shade, the sound of the wind in the branches, and so on. All these 
things, taken together, form, as it were, the focus of rays emitted by our mind 
and gradually focused on the external object, which may coincide with it 
either badly or well. 
In the further complexities of mental life, memories of representations 
undergo the same process as memories of sensations. In accumulating, 
memories of representations or 'images of representation' become associated 
along the most varied lines, are put together, contrasted, form groups and, in 
the end, give rise to concepts.
Thus, out of the various sensations experienced at different times (in 
groups), there arises in a child the representation of a tree (this tree), and later, 
out of the images of representation of different trees is formed the concept of 
a tree, i.e. not of this particular tree but of a tree in general. 
The formation of concepts leads to the formation of words and the appearance 
of speech. 
The rudiments of speech may appear on the lowest level of intelligence, at
the stage of living by sensations; at the stage of living by representations 
speech becomes considerably more complex. But, so long as there are no 
concepts, it will not be speech in the true sense of the word. 
On the lower levels of intelligence certain sensations may be expressed by
certain sounds. In this way it is possible to transmit general impressions of 
fear, anger, pleasure. These sounds may serve as danger signals, as a 
summoning call, an entreaty, a threat and so on. But one cannot convey much 
by them. 
In the subsequent development of speech, if words or sounds express 
representations, as in the case of children, it means that a given sound or a 
given word designates only this or that particular object. For every new 
similar object there must be a new sound or a

[PAG 76]
new word. If the speaker designates different objects by the same word or sound, it 
means either that, in his opinion, it is one and the same object, or that he calls by the 
same name objects known to be different. In either case it is very difficult to understand 
him. And speech of this kind cannot serve as an example of clear speech. For instance, 
if a child calls a tree by a certain sound or word, having in mind only that tree, and 
being in complete ignorance of other trees, then any new tree he sees he will call by 
another word, or he will take it for the same tree. The speech in which 'words' 
correspond to representations, consists, as it were, of proper names; it has no generic 
nouns yet. Moreover, not only nouns, but verbs, adjectives and adverbs also have the 
character of 'proper names', i.e. names applicable only to the given action, the given 
quality, the given characteristic. 
The appearance of words of general meaning indicates the appearance of concepts 
in the mind. 
Speech consists of words; every word expresses a concept. A concept and a word 
are really the same thing, only the one (the concept) stands, as it were, for the inner 
aspect, while the other (the word) for the outer aspect. Or, according to Dr Bucke (the 
author of the book Cosmic Consciousness about which I shall have much to say later), 
the word, (i.e. the concept) is the algebraic sign of a thing. 
It has been noticed thousands of times that the brain of a thinking man does not 
exceed in size the brain of a non-thinking wild man in anything like the proportion in 
which the mind of the thinker exceeds the mind of the savage. The reason is that the 
brain of Herbert Spencer has very little more work to do than has the brain of a native 
Australian, for this reason, that Spencer does all his characteristic mental work by 
signs or counters which stand for concepts, while the savage does all or nearly all his 
by means of cumbersome recepts. The savage is in a position comparable to that of an 
astronomer who makes his calculations by arithmetic, while Spencer is in the position 
of one who makes them by algebra. The first will fill many great sheets of paper with 
figures and go through immense labour; the other will make the same calculations on 
an envelope and with comparatively little mental work.* 
In our speech words express concepts or ideas. Ideas are broader concepts; they are 
not a group sign for similar representations, but embrace groups of dissimilar 
representations, or even groups of concepts. Thus an idea is a complex or an abstract 
concept. 
In addition to the simple sensations of the sense organs - colour, sound, touch, smell 
and taste; in addition to simple emotions of 
* R. M. Bucke, Cosmic Consciousness, a Study in the Evolution of the Human 
Mind, Innes & Sons, Philadelphia, 1905, p. 12.

[PAG 77]
pleasure, displeasure, joy, fear, surprise, astonishment, curiosity, laughter, 
anger and many others, there proceed in our consciousness series of complex 
sensations and higher (complex) emotions - moral emotion, aesthetic emotion 
and religious emotion. The content of emotional experiences, even of the 
simplest, to say nothing of those which are complex, can never be wholly
fitted into concepts or ideas and, therefore, can never be correctly and exactly 
expressed in words. Words can only hint at it or lead to it. The interpretation 
of emotional experiences and emotional understanding is the aim of art. In 
the combination of words, in their meaning, in rhythm, in music, in the 
combination of meaning, rhythm and music; in sounds, in colours, in lines, in 
forms - men create a new world and try to express in it that which they feel 
but cannot express and convey simply in words, i.e. in concepts. The 
emotional tones of life, i.e. the 'feelings' are best expressed in music. On the 
other hand, music is utterly incapable of expressing concepts, i.e. thoughts. 
Poetry aims at expressing the two together. The combination of feeling and 
thought of high intensity leads to a higher form of inner life, difficult to 
define in ordinary language. Thus, in art we already find the first experiments 
in a language of the future. Art marches in the vanguard of inner evolution, 
anticipating the forms it is to assume tomorrow. 
At the present moment an average man, taken as a standard, has three units 
of mental life - sensation, representation and concept. Observation further 
shows us that in some people at certain moments there appears, as it were, a 
fourth unit of mental life, which different authors and schools call by
different names, but in which the element of perception or the element of 
ideas is always connected with the emotional element. 
If Kant's idea is true, if space with its characteristics is a property of our 
consciousness and not a property of the external world, then the three­
dimensionality of the world must in some way be dependent on the 
constitution of our mental apparatus. 
Concretely, the question may be put in this way: What is the relation of the 
three-dimensional extension of the world to the fact that our mental apparatus 
contains sensations, representations and concepts, and that they stand exactly
in this order? 
We have a mental apparatus of this kind and the world is three­
dimensional. How to prove that the three-dimensionality of the world 
depends on this particular constitution of our mental apparatus? 
To prove or refute this conclusively would be possible only through 
experience. 
If we were able to alter our mental apparatus and observe that the