=== Tertium Organum (P. D. Ouspensky).pdf — CHUNK 10/18 ===
Chars: 44,045 | Offset: 399,926

stortion, or even a complete disappearance of 
mental faculties, manifesting in our sphere.
The idea of comparing three-dimensional and four-dimensional bodies 
enables us to assert that not all activity of the mind passes through the brain, 
but only a part of it.* 
* In all that has been said above it would be more correct to substitute for the word 
brain the word body, organism New trends of scientific psychology bring us precisely 
to the understanding of the psychological value of different functions which have been 
unknown till recent tunes and are even now but little investigated The mind is 
connected not only with the brain but with the whole body, with all the organs, with all 
the tissues The theory of hormones, the study of the activity of the glands and many 
other things round which science is now revolving, already show that the brain is by no 
means the sole conductor of the menial activity of man

[PAG 164]
Each of us is in reality an abiding psychical entity far more extensive than he knows ­
an individuality which can never express itself completely through any corporeal 
manifestation. The Self manifests through the organism; but there is always some part 
of the Self unmanifested.* 
The 'positivist' remains dissatisfied. He will say: prove to me that thought can take 
place without the brain, then I will believe. 
I shall answer him by the question: What in this case will constitute proof? 
There are no proofs and there cannot be any. The existence of mind without the brain 
(without the body), if it is possible, is for us a fact which cannot be proved like a 
physical fact. 
And if my opponent is sincere in his reasoning, he will become convinced that there 
cannot be no proofs - because he himself has no means a/ascertaining the existence of 
mind acting independently of the brain. Indeed, let us suppose that the thought of a 
dead man (i.e. of a man whose brain has ceased to work) continues to function. How 
can we ascertain this? We cannot. We have means of communication (speech, writing) 
with beings who are in the same conditions as ourselves, i.e. whose mind acts through 
the brain; the existence of mind in such beings we can deduce by analogy with 
ourselves. But the existence of mind in other beings, irrespective of whether there are 
such beings or not, we cannot ascertain by our ordinary means. 
This last fact gives a key to the understanding of the true relation between the mind 
and the brain. Our mind, being merely a reflection thrown back by the brain, can only 
notice other reflections similar to itself. We have established earlier that we can make 
conclusions about the mind of other beings by means of exchanging thoughts with them 
and by analogy with ourselves. Now we can add that, because of this we can only know 
about the existence of minds similar to ours and can know no others, whether they exist 
or not, until we find ourselves on their plane. 
If we should one day feel our mind not only as it is reflected by the brain but in a 
wider sense, we would simultaneously have the possibility of discovering beings, 
analogous to ourselves, whose mind is independent of the brain, if such beings exist in 
nature. 
But do such beings exist or not? What can our thought, such as it is now, tell us 
concerning this? 
Observing the world from outside, we see in it actions proceeding 
* From Frederick Myers's essay on the 'Subliminal Consciousness', as quoted in W. 
James's book The Varieties of Religious Experience, New York, Longmans Green, 
1917.

[PAG 165]
from rational, conscious causes, such as the work of human beings appears to 
us; and we see actions proceeding from unconscious blind forces of nature, 
such as the movement of waves, ebbing and flowing tides, the flow of rivers, 
etc., etc. 
Such a division of observed actions into rational and mechanical seems 
naive even from the positivist point of view. If we have learned something by
the study of nature, if the positivist method has given us anything at all, it is 
the conviction of the essential unity of phenomena. We know, and we know 
this for certain, that things basically similar cannot result from dissimilar 
causes. And scientific philosophy knows it too. Therefore it also regards the 
above-mentioned division as naive and, aware of the impossibility of such a 
dualism - that one part of observed phenomena proceeds from rational and 
conscious causes and another part from irrational and unconscious - it finds it 
possible to explain everything as proceeding from irrational and unconscious 
causes. 
Scientific observation tells us that the apparent rationality of human actions 
is nothing but illusion and self-deception. Man is a plaything in the hands of 
elemental forces. He is only a transmitting station of forces. Everything that
he thinks he does is in reality done for him by external forces which enter into 
him with air, with food, with sunlight. Man does not perform a single action 
by himself. He is only a prism through which a line of action is reflected in a 
certain way. But as a ray of light does not originate from the prism, so the 
action does not originate from man's intellect. 
In confirmation of this there is advanced, among other things, the 
'theoretical experiment' of German psycho-physiologists. They assert that, if it 
were possible from the moment of birth to deprive a man of ALL EXTERNAL 
IMPRESSIONS: of light, sound, touch, heat, cold and so on, and at the same time 
keep him alive, such a man would not be capable of ANY, EVEN THE MOST 
SIGNIFICANT ACTION. 
It follows from this that man is an automaton, similar to the automaton on 
which the American physicist Tesla worked and which, obeying electric 
currents and long-distance wireless waves, was supposed to perform a whole 
series of complex movements. 
It follows that all man's actions depend on external stimuli. The smallest 
reflex requires an external irritation. A more complex action needs a whole 
series of preceding complex irritations. Sometimes there is a great lapse of 
time between the irritation and the action, and a man does not feel any 
connection between them. Consequently he regards his actions as volitional, 
whereas, in actual fact, volitional actions do not exist. A man cannot do 
anything by himself, just as a

[PAG 166]
stone cannot jump into the air at will: it is necessary for something to throw it 
up. In the same way a man needs something to give him a shock, and then he 
will develop exactly as much energy as the shock (or preceding shocks) have 
imparted to him - and not a whit more. This is what positivism teaches. 
From a LOGICAL STANDPOINT this theory is more correct than the theory of 
two kinds of actions: RATIONAL and IRRATIONAL. At least it establishes the 
principle of the essential UNIFORMITY. Indeed, how is it possible to suppose 
that in a large machine some parts move according to their own wish and 
judgment? It should be either one or the other. Either all parts of the machine 
possess a realization of their function and act according to this realization, or 
all of them are worked by the same motor and are brought into motion by the 
same driving belt. The enormous service rendered by positivism is that it has 
established this principle of uniformity. It remains for us to determine in 
what this uniformity consists. 
The positivist view of the world asserts that the beginning of everything is 
unconscious energy, produced by unknown causes at some unknown time. 
Having passed through a long series of imperceptible electro-magnetic and 
physico-chemical processes, this energy manifests itself for us in visible and 
tangible motion, then in growth, i.e. in phenomena of life and finally in 
psychological phenomena. 
This view has been examined already and the conclusion drawn that it is 
quite impossible to regard physical phenomena as the cause of psychological 
phenomena, whereas psychological phenomena, on the contrary, often serve 
as an indisputable cause of physical phenomena observed by us. The 
observed process of psychological phenomena arising under the influence of 
external mechanical shocks does not in the least mean that physical 
phenomena originate the psychological ones. They are not the cause but 
merely the shock upsetting the balance. In order that external shocks should 
provoke psychological phenomena an organism is needed, i.e. a complex and 
animated life. The cause of psychological life lies in the organism, in its 
animation which may be defined as the potential of psychological life. 
Moreover, from the very essence of the concept motion, i.e. the basis of the 
physico-mechanical world, we have drawn the conclusion that motion is not 
at all a self-evident truth, that the idea of motion arose in us from the 
limitation and incompleteness of our sense of space (the slit through which 
we observe the world). And we have established that the idea of time is not 
deduced from observation of motion, as is usually supposed, but the idea of 
motion results from our sense of time - and that the idea of motion is quite 
definitely a

[PAG 167]
function of the time-sense which, in itself, is the limit or the boundary of the space­
sense of a being of a given psychological make-up. It has also been made clear that the 
idea of motion could have arisen from the comparison of two fields of vision. And 
generally the whole analysis of the fundamental categories of our perception of the 
world - of space and time - has shown that we have no grounds whatever for regarding 
motion as a basic principle of the world. 
And if this is so, if it is impossible to assume the existence of an unconscious 
mechanical motor behind the scenes of the world's structure, one is forced to suppose 
that the world is alive and intelligent. Because either one or another thing is true: either 
the world is mechanical and dead, 'accidental', or it is alive and animated. There can be 
nothing dead in living nature, just as there can be nothing alive in dead nature. 
After going through a long period of unconscious and semi-conscious existence in 
the mineral, vegetable and animal kingdoms, nature attains its last great development 
in man, and asks itself: What am I? Man is the organ of the self-consciousness of 
nature. 
So wrote Schopenhauer in his Aphorisms and, of course, it is a very beautiful 
picture. But we have no grounds whatever for considering man as the crown of all 
nature's creation. He is only the HIGHEST WE KNOW. 
Positivism would be quite right and its picture of the world would not have a single 
defect if there were no reason in the world anywhere or at any time. Then, willy-nilly, 
it would be necessary to admit that the universe is a mechanical toy, accidentally 
formed in space. But the fact of the existence of mind 'spoils all the statistics'. It cannot 
possibly be left out. 
We have either to admit the existence of two principles - 'spirit' and 'matter' - or to 
choose one of them. 
In this, dualism is destroyed because, if we admit the separate existence of spirit and 
matter and carry our reasoning further, we are bound to come to the conclusion either 
that spirit is unreal while matter is real, or that matter is unreal and spirit is real; in 
other words that either spirit is material or matter is spiritual. Consequently one has to 
choose one or the other - either spirit or matter. 
But to think really MONISTICALLY is more difficult than it seems, I have met many 
people who called themselves and sincerely regarded themselves as 'monists'. But in 
actual fact they never departed from the most naive dualism and never experienced 
even a spark of understanding of the world's unity.

[PAG 168]
Positivism, regarding 'motion' or 'energy' as the basis of everything, can never be 
'monistic'. It cannot deny the fact of mind. If it were able to disregard this fact 
completely, all would be well and the universe could pass for an accidentally formed 
mechanical toy. Unfortunately, however, even positivism cannot deny the existence of 
mind, nor can it destroy it. It can only bring it down as low as possible, calling it a 
reflection of reality, the essence of which lies in motion. 
But in that case how to deal with the fact that the 'reflection' possesses an infinitely 
greater potentiality than the reality? 
How can this be? From what is this reality reflected or through what is it refracted in 
such a way that, in its reflected form, it has an infinitely greater potentiality than in the 
original form? 
A consistent 'materialist-monist' would be able to say only that 'reality' is reflected 
from itself, i.e. that 'one motion' reflects from another motion. But this is nothing but 
dialectics and it does not explain what mind is, because it is something different from 
motion. 
However much we may persist in calling thought motion, we know that they are two 
different things: different as regards our perception of them, things belonging to 
different worlds, incommensurable and capable of existing simultaneously. Moreover, 
thought can exist without motion, whereas motion cannot exist without thought, 
because the necessary condition of motion - time - comes from the mind. If there is no 
mind, there is no time, as it exists for us. If there is no time, there is no motion. 
We cannot escape this fact and, thinking logically, are forced to admit two principles. 
But, if we consider the very admission of two principles illogical, we are bound to 
accept THOUGHT as a single principle, and regard motion as an ILLUSION OF THOUGHT. 
What does it mean? It means that there can be no 'monistic materialism'. Materialism 
can only be dualistic, i.e. it has to recognize two principles', motion and thought. Our 
concepts are connected with language. Our language is profoundly dualistic. It is a 
terrible drag. I have already said once before, what a drag language is on our thought, 
making it impossible to express the relationships of the existing universe. In our 
language there is only one eternally becoming universe. The 'Eternal Now' cannot be 
expressed in our language. 
Thus our language depicts to us an admittedly false universe: dual, when in reality it 
is one, and eternally becoming, when in reality it is eternally existing. 
If we realize how much this fact changes everything, if we understand to what extent 
our language hides from us the true picture of

[PAG 169]
the world, we shall see that it is not only difficult but absolutely impossible to 
express in our language the true relationships of things of the real world. 
This difficulty can be overcome only by the formation of new concepts and 
expanded analogies. 
Later I shall make clear the principles and methods of this expansion, 
methods and principles which we already possess and which can be extracted 
from the store of our knowledge. For the moment it is important to establish 
one thing - THE NEED OF UNIFORMITY - the monistic character of the universe. . 
. . 
As a matter of principle, it is immaterial what to regard as the beginning:
spirit or matter. What is important is to admit their oneness. 
But what then is matter? 
On the one side it is a logical concept, i.e. a form of thinking. No one has 
ever seen matter, nor will he ever see it: matter can only be thought. On the 
other hand it is - illusion taken for reality. Matter is a section of something, a 
non-existent, imaginary section. But that of which matter is a section does 
exist. It is the real, four-dimensional world, perhaps a many-dimensional 
world. 
Wood, the substance from which a table is made, exists but we do not know 
the true nature of its existence. All we know about it is the form of our 
perception of it. 
And, if we are no longer there, it will continue to exist, but only for a 
perception working in the same way as ours. 
But in itself this substance exists in some entirely different manner, HOW, 
we do not know. One thing is certain; it does not exist in space and time ­
these forms we impose on it. Probably all similar wood of different centuries 
and different parts of the world forms one mass -one body, perhaps one being.
It is certain that the particular substance (or part of substance) from which this 
table is made, has no separate existence other than in our perception. We do 
not understand that a thing is only an artificial definition by our senses of 
some undefinable cause which infinitely transcends the thing.
But a thing may acquire an individual and separate soul of its own. And in 
that case a thing exists independently of our perception. Many things possess 
such souls, especially old things, old houses, old books, works of art, etc. 
But what grounds have we for thinking that there exists in the world a mind 
other than our human one and that of animals and plants?

[PAG 170]
First of all, of course, the thought that everything in the world is alive and 
animated and that manifestations of life and animation must exist on all 
planes and in all forms. But we can see mind only in forms analogous to ours. 
The most important thing is that we have no reason to consider our mind as 
the only and highest form existing in the universe. 
The question stands thus How could we learn about the existence of the 
mind of other sections of the world, if they exist? 
By two methods, through COMMUNICATION, EXCHANGE OF THOUGHTS and by 
means of CONCLUSIONS BY ANALOGY. 
For the first it is necessary that our mental life should itself become similar 
to theirs, should transcend the limits of the three-dimensional world, i.e. a 
change of our form of perception and representation is required. 
The second may result from a gradual expansion of the faculty of drawing
analogies. In trying to think outside the usual categories, in trying to look at 
things and ourselves from a new angle, and simultaneously from many 
angles, in trying to liberate our thinking from the customary partitions of time 
and space, we gradually begin to notice analogies between things, where 
previously we had seen nothing at all. Our mind grows, and with it grows the 
capacity of drawing analogies. With every new degree reached, this capacity
broadens and enriches our mind. Each moment we advance more rapidly, 
each new step becomes easier. Our mental life becomes different. And then, 
applying oneself one's expanded capacity of drawing analogies and looking
about, we suddenly notice around us a mental life the existence of which we 
never suspected before. And we understand why we could not see it before. It 
lies on another plane, not on the plane on which our mental life had 
previously existed In this way precisely this capacity of drawing new 
analogies is the beginning of changes which lead us to another plane of being
The mind of man begins to penetrate into the world of noumena which is 
akin to it. Together with this, man's view of the phenomenal world undergoes 
a change. Phenomena may suddenly acquire in his eyes an entirely new 
grouping As already said, similar things may prove different, different things
similar, totally separate, unconnected things may prove to be parts of one 
large whole of some quite new category, whereas things which appear
indissolubly connected and forming one whole may in reality prove to be 
manifestations of different minds, having nothing in common and even being
ignorant of one another's existence. Such in fact may prove to be any whole of 
our world, a man, an animal, a planet, i.e. consisting of different minds,

[PAG 171]
representing, as it were, a battlefield of different beings. 
In every whole of our world we see a great many opposite tendencies, inclinations, 
strivings, efforts. Each whole is as it were a battleground of a great number of opposite 
forces, each of which acts by itself, strives to attain its own ends, usually to the 
destruction of the whole. But the interaction of these forces constitutes the life of the 
whole. And in everything there is always something acting which limits the activity of 
separate tendencies. This something is the mental life of the whole. To establish the 
existence of this life by means of analogy with oneself or by way of communication 
with it and an exchange of thoughts is impossible for us. But a new way opens up before 
us. We see a separate and entirely new function (the preservation of the whole) Behind 
this function we presuppose the existence of a separate something. This separate 
something, possessing a definite function, is impossible without a separate mental life. 
If the whole possesses mental life, then separate tendencies of forces must also possess 
a life of their own. A body or an organism is the point of intersection of the lines of 
these lives, a meeting-place, perhaps a battlefield. Our 'I' - this is the battlefield in 
which, each moment, one or another emotion, one or another habit or tendency takes the 
upper hand, subjugating the others for that moment and identifying itself with the 'I'. 
But the 'I' is also a being, possessing its own life; 
only it is very little aware of what it consists of and is constantly becoming connected 
now with one part of itself, now with another Have we any right to presume the 
existence of BEINGS in the organs and parts of the body, in thoughts and emotions of 
man? We have, because we know that there is nothing purely mechanical, and that 
every something possessing a separate function MUST be animated and can be called a 
being. 
All the beings, the existence of which we may presuppose in the world of many 
dimensions, may not know one another, i.e. they may not know that we are connecting 
them together into various wholes in our phenomenal world, just as in general they may 
have no knowledge of our phenomenal world and its relationships. But themselves they 
must know, although we cannot determine the degree of clarity of their consciousness. 
It may be clearer than ours, or it may be more nebulous, dreamlike. Between these 
beings there may go on a continuous, though imperfectly realized, exchange of 
thoughts, similar to the metabolism of a living body. They may experience certain 
feelings in common, certain thoughts may arise in them all, simultaneously as it were, 
under the stimulus of common causes. According to the lines of this inner communion 
they must divide themselves into different

[PAG 172]
wholes of some categories either entirely incomprehensible to us or only partially 
suspected. The essence of each of such separate beings must consist in knowing itself 
and its most intimate functions and relations; it must feel the things which are 
analogous to itself and must be able to tell about itself and them. In other words, this 
consciousness must consist in always having before it a picture of itself and its most 
intimate relations It is eternally reviewing this picture, as it were, and immediately 
transmits it to another being upon entering into communication with it. 
Whether these beings belonging to sections of the world other than ours exist or not 
we cannot tell in the existing conditions of our perception. Only a transformed mind 
can sense them Our ordinary perception and thinking is too absorbed in the sensations 
of the phenomenal world and in itself and therefore does not reflect impressions 
coming from other beings, or reflects them so feebly that they do not become fixed in it 
in any perceptible form And we do not realize that we are in constant communication 
with the noumenon of everything surrounding us, both far and near, with beings both 
similar to us and totally different from us, with the lives of everything in the world and 
with the life of the whole world. If, however, the impressions coming from other 
beings are so strong that our mind senses them, it immediately projects them into the 
external phenomenal world and seeks a cause for them in the phenomenal world, 
exactly like a two-dimensional being living on a plane seeks on its own plane the 
causes of impressions which come from the higher world. 
Our mind is limited by its phenomenal perception, i.e. is encompassed in itself. The 
world of phenomena, i.e. the form of its own perception, encloses it like a ring, like a 
wall, and it does not see anything apart from this wall 
But if it manages to escape beyond this surrounding wall, it inevitably sees a great 
many new things in the world. 
If we get rid of self-elements in our perception, writes Hinton (A New Era of 
Thought), then — 
it will be found that the deadness which we ascribe to the external world is not really 
there, but is put in by us because of our own limitations It is really the self-elements in 
our knowledge which make us talk of mechanical necessity, dead matter When our 
limitations fall, we behold the spirit of the world as we behold the spirit of a friend ­
something which is discerned in and through the material presentation of a body to us 
Our thought means are sufficient at present to show us human souls, but

[PAG 173]
all except human beings is, as far as science is concerned, inanimate Our self-element 
must be got rid of from our perception, and this will be changed* 
And is the unknowableness of the noumenal world indeed as absolute for us as it 
sometimes appears? 
In the Critique of Pure Reason and other writings, Kant denied the possibility of 
'spiritual vision' But in Dreams of a Spirit-seer he not only admits this possibility but 
also gives it one of the best definitions we have ever had up to now He asserts 
unequivocally 
I confess that I am very much inclined to assert the existence of immaterial natures in 
the world, and to put my soul itself into that class of beings 
These immaterial beings 
immediately united with each other 
might form, 
perhaps, a great whole which might be called the immaterial world 
[Every man is a 
being of two worlds of the immaterial world and the material world, and] it will be 
proved, I do not know where or when, that the human soul also in this life forms an 
indissoluble communion with all immaterial natures of the spirit-world, that, alter­
natively, it acts upon and receives impressions from that world of which nevertheless 
it is not conscious while it is still man 
We should 
regard the human soul as being conjoined in its present life with two 
worlds at the same time, of which it clearly perceives only the material world, in so 
far as it is confined with a body, and thus forms a personal unit 
It is, therefore, indeed one subject, which is thus at the same time a member of the 
visible and of the invisible world, but not one and the same person, for, on account 
of their different quality, the conceptions of the one world are not ideas associated 
with those of the other world, thus, what I think of as spirit, is not remembered by 
me as man, and, conversely, my state as man does not at all enter into the conception 
of myself as a spirit 
[Birth, life, death are only states of the soul 
Consequently, our body alone is 
perishable our essence is not perishable and must have existed even at the time when 
our body had no existence The life of man is dual It is composed of two lives the 
animal and the spiritual The first life is the life of man and, in order to live this life, 
man needs a body The second life is the life of the spirit, man's soul lives that life 
separately from the body and must live in it after its segregation from the body]** 
In an article on Kant in the Northern Messenger (1888) A L Vohnsky says that both 
in Vorlesungen and in the Dreams of the Spirit-seer Kant refuses to admit the 
possibility of only one thing the possibility of a physical perception of spiritual 
phenomena 
* C H Hinton, A. New Era of Thought, London, George Allen & Unwin, 1910, 
PP 36, 37 
** Immanuel Kant, Dreams of a Spirit seer, London, 1915, P 52

[PAG 174]
Thus Kant recognizes not only the possibility of the existence of a spiritual conscious 
world, but also the possibility of communion with it. 
Hegel built all his philosophy on the possibility of a direct perception of truth, on 
spiritual vision. 
Now, approaching the question of the two worlds from the psychological side, from 
the side of the theory of cognition, we must firmly establish the fact that before we can 
hope to learn anything of the noumenal sphere, we must define all we can define of the 
properties of the many-dimensional world, using for this the purely intellectual method 
of reasoning. Very likely we shall not be able to define very much by this method. 
Perhaps our definitions will be crude, will not quite correspond to the subtle 
differentiation of relations in the noumenal world. All this is very probable and should 
be taken into account. And yet we must define what we can and find out, first of all, 
with all possible exactitude, what the noumenal world cannot be, and then, what it can 
be, i.e. which relations are impossible and which are possible in it. 
This is necessary in order that we could, on coming into contact with the real world, 
distinguish it from the phenomenal world and, above all, that we may not take for the 
noumenal world a simple reflection of the phenomenal world. The reason why we are 
ignorant of the world of causes, the reason why we are imprisoned in the phenomenal 
world, is precisely that we do not know how to see where the one ends and the other 
begins. 
We are in constant contact with the world of causes, we live in it, because our mind 
and our function in the world, incomprehensible to us, is a part of it or a reflection of it. 
But we neither see nor know it, because we either deny its existence, consider that 
everything existing is phenomenal and that nothing that is not phenomenal exists; or we 
accept it but strive to know it in the forms of the three-dimensional phenomenal world; 
or else we seek and cannot find it, because we lose our way in the midst of the 
deceptions and illusions of the reflected phenomenal world which we mistake for the 
noumenal world. 
It is in this that the tragedy of our spiritual searchings lies. We do not know what it is 
we search for. And the only means of freeing ourselves from this tragedy is a 
preliminary intellectual definition of the properties of what we search for. We must not 
approach the world of causes without these definitions, with nothing but indefinite 
sensations, for in that case we shall get lost in its borderland. 
This was understood by Spinoza who wrote that he could not speak of God, not 
knowing his attributes.

[PAG 175]
When I learnt Euclid's elements [he wrote] I first understood that the three angles of a 
triangle are equal to two right angles, and I clearly perceived this property of a 
triangle although I was ignorant of many others. As regards spectres, or ghosts, I 
have never yet heard of an intelligible property of theirs, but only of phantasies which 
no one can grasp.* 
We have established certain criteria which permit us to appraise the world 
of noumena or the 'world of spirits'; and we must make use of them. 
First of all we can say that the world of noumena, i.e. the real world cannot 
be three-dimensional and cannot contain anything three-dimensional, i.e. 
commensurable with physical objects, similar to them in outside appearance, 
possessing form. In other words, the noumenal world cannot contain anything
having extension in space and changing in time. And, above all, it cannot 
contain anything dead, inanimate, unconscious, although the level of 
consciousness may be different. In the world of causes everything must be 
conscious, because it is in itself - consciousness, the soul of the world. 
Moreover, we must bear in mind that the world of causes is the world of the 
miraculous. That which appears ordinary to us can never be real. The real 
appears miraculous to us; we do not believe in it, do not recognize it. 
Consequently we do not feel the mysteries of which life is full. 
Only the unreal is ordinary. The real must appear miraculous. 
The mystery of time permeates everything. It is felt in every stone which 
may have witnessed the glacial periods, and the ichthyosaurus and the 
mammoth. It is felt in the tomorrow which we do not see but which perhaps 
sees us and which may prove to be our last day or, on the contrary, a day of 
some achievements of which we know nothing today.
The mystery of thought creates everything. As soon as we understand that 
thought is not a 'function of motion' and that motion itself is only a function 
of thought; as soon as we begin to feel the depth of THIS MYSTERY, we shall 
see that the whole world is a kind of vast hallucination which does not 
frighten us and does not make us think that we are mad, only because we are 
accustomed to it. 
The mystery of infinity is the greatest of all mysteries. It tells us that all the 
galaxies - the whole visible universe - have no dimensions as compared with 
infinity; that they are equal to a point, a mathematical point which has no 
extension whatever, and that, at the same time, points which are not 
measurable for us may have a different extension and different dimensions. 
* The Correspondence of Spinoza, trs. A. Wolf, London, George Allen & Unwin, 
1928, Letter LVI - to Boxel, 1674.

[PAG 176]
In 'positivist' thinking we make efforts to FORGET ABOUT THIS, NOT 
TO THINK ABOUT IT. 
At some future time positivism will be denned as a system which enables 
one not to think about real things and to limit oneself strictly to the domain of 
the unreal and the illusory.

[PAG 177]
CHAPTER 17  
A living and intelligent universe Different forms and lines of intelligence Animated 
nature Souls of stones and souls of trees The soul of a forest The human 'I' as a 
collective intelligence Man as a complex being 'Mankind' as a being The soul of the 
world The face of Mahadeva Professor James on the animated world Fechner's ideas 
Zendavesta The living Earth 
If intelligence exists in the world, then intelligence must exist in everything,
although it may be different in its manifestation 
We are accustomed to regard as animate and intelligent, in one or another 
way, only those objects which we call 'beings', i.e. those whom we find 
analogous to ourselves in the functions which, in our eyes, define an animate 
being.
Inanimate objects and mechanical phenomena are to us lifeless and devoid 
of intelligence. 
But this cannot be so. 
Only for our limited mind, for our limited power of communion with other 
minds, for our limited capacity of analogy does intelligence and, generally
speaking, all mental life manifest itself in certain definite classes of living
beings, side by side with which there exist long series of dead things and 
mechanical phenomena. 
But if we could not talk with each other, if no one of us could infer the 
existence of intelligence and mental life in another man by analogy with 
himself, each one would regard as a living being only himself and would 
relegate all other people to mechanical 'dead' nature 
In other words, we recognize as animate beings only those possessing a 
mind accessible to our observation in the three-dimensional section of the 
world, i.e. beings whose mind is analogous to ours. About others we do not 
know and cannot know. All beings whose minds manifest themselves 
otherwise than in the three-dimensional section of the world are 
incomprehensible and inaccessible to us. If they come into contact with our 
life at all, we are obliged to regard their manifestations as actions of a dead 
and unconscious nature. Our capacity for analogy is limited to this section. 
We cannot think logically beyond the conditions of a three-dimensional 
section. Consequently everything that lives, thinks and feels in a manner not 
completely analogous to ours is bound to appear to us dead and mechanical. 
But sometimes we dimly feel the intense life which goes on in the

[PAG 178]
phenomena of nature, and sense a vivid emotionality manifesting itself in the 
phenomena of nature which, to us, is dead. I mean that behind the phenomena 
of visible manifestations there is felt the noumenon of emotions. 
In electrical discharges, in lightning, in thunder, in the gusts and howling
of the wind are felt flashes of sensory-nervous tremors of some gigantic 
organism. 
A peculiar mood for their own is felt in certain days. There are days full of 
strange mysticism, days which have their own individual and unique 
consciousness, their own emotions, their own thoughts. One may almost talk 
with such days. And they tell you that they have lived a long long time, 
maybe for an eternity, and have known and seen many things. 
In the changing of season; in the yellow leaves of the autumn with their 
smell and the memories they bring; in the first snow dusting the fields and 
adding a peculiar freshness and sharpness to the air; in the waters of spring, in 
the warming sun and the awakening but still bare branches through which 
gleams the deep blue sky; in the white nights of the north and in the dark, 
humid and warm tropical nights spangled with stars - in all these are the 
thoughts, the feelings, the moods, or more correctly, the expression of 
feelings, thoughts and moods of that mysterious being. Nature. 
There can be nothing dead or mechanical in Nature. If life and feeling exist 
at all, they must exist in everything. Life and intelligence constitute the world. 
On the contrary, if we look/row our side, from the side of phenomena, we 
must admit that every phenomenon, every object has a mind. 
A mountain, a tree, a river, the fish in the river, drops of water, rain, a 
plant, fire - each separately must possess a mind of its own. 
Looking/row the other side - the side of noumena - one is forced to say that 
everything and every phenomenon of our world is a manifestation in our 
section of some incomprehensible thinking and feeling belonging to another 
section and possessing there functions which are incomprehensible for us. 
One intelligence there is such and its function is such that it manifests itself 
here in the form of a mountain, another in the form of a tree, a third in the 
form of a fish, and so on. 
Phenomena of our world are very different. If they are nothing but 
manifestations on our world of different intelligent beings, then these beings 
must also be very different. 
Between the mind of a mountain and that of a man there must be the same 
difference as between a mountain and man.

[PAG 179]
Earlier we have admitted the possibility of different existences. We said that a house 
exists, and a man exists, and an idea exists - but they all exist differently. If we develop 
this thought further, we shall find a great many kinds of different existences. 
The fantasy of fairy tales, animating the whole world, endows mountains, rivers and 
forests with minds similar to the human. But this is just as untrue as a total denial of 
mind in a dead nature. Noumena are as different and as varied as phenomena which are 
their manifestations in our sphere. 
Every stone, every grain of sand, every planet has a noumenon, consisting of life and 
of mind and connecting them with certain wholes larger cosmoses incomprehensible to 
us. 
The activity of life of separate units may be very different. The degree of activity of 
life may be judged from the point of view of reproductivity. In the inorganic, mineral 
nature, this activity is so small that units of that nature accessible to our observation do 
not reproduce themselves, although it may only seem so to us owing to the insufficient 
breadth of our view in time and space. Perhaps if our view embraced hundreds of 
thousands of years and our entire planet at once, we should be able to see the growth of 
minerals and metals. 
If we were to observe from the inside one cubic centimetre of the human body, not 
aware of the existence of the whole body and of man, phenomena going on in this tiny 
cube of flesh would appear to be elemental phenomena of dead nature. 
But in any case, for us, phenomena are divided into living and mechanical, and 
invisible objects are divided into organic and inorganic. The latter are broken up 
without resistance, remaining the same. A stone can be split in two - the result will be 
two stones. But if a snail is cut in two, the result will not be two snails. This means that 
the mind of a stone is very simple, primitive - so simple that it can be broken up 
without undergoing a change. But a snail consists of living cells. Each living cell is a 
complex being, much more complex than a stone. The body of a snail has the capacity 
to move, to feed, to experience pleasure or pain, to seek the former and avoid the latter, 
and above all it possesses the capacity to multiply, to create new forms similar to itself, 
to combine inorganic matter into these forms, and to make physical laws serve itself. A 
snail is a complex centre of transformation of one kind of physical energy into others. 
This centre possesses its own mind; this is the reason why it is indivisible. And the 
mind of a snail is infinitely higher than that of a stone. A snail has a consciousness of 
form, i.e. the form of a snail is, in a sense, conscious of itself. The form of a stone is not 
conscious of itself.

[PAG 180]
In organic nature where we see life it is easier to presume the existence of a mind. In 
a snail, a living being, we already have no difficulty in admitting a certain kind of 
mind. But life belongs not only to separate indivisible organisms - anything indivisible 
is a living being. Each cell in an organism is a living being and must possess a certain 
kind of mind. 
Each combination of cells possessing a definite function also is a living being. 
Another, a higher combination - an organ - is again a living being and has its own 
mind. 
Indivisibility in our sphere is a sign of a definite function. If every phenomenon on 
our plane is a manifestation of something existing on another plane, then indivisibility 
on our side evidently corresponds to indivisibility, i.e. individuality on that other side. 
Divisibility on our side denotes divisibility on the other side. The intelligence of the 
divisible can manifest itself only in a collective non-individual intelligence. We admit 
consciousness only in a whole organism. 
But even a whole organism is merely a section of a certain magnitude which we may 
call the life of this organism from birth to death. This life may be represented as a four­
dimensional body stretched out in time. The physical three-dimensional body is only a 
section of the four-dimensional body. Linga Sharira. The image of a man which we 
represent to ourselves, his 'personality' is again only a section of the true personality 
which undoubtedly has its own separate mind. Thus we may presume in man three 
minds — the first, the mind of the body, which manifests itself in instincts and in the 
constant work of the body, the second, his personality, a complex and constantly 
changing 'I' which we know and in which we are conscious of ourselves; the third, the 
mind of his whole life - a greater and higher 'I'. On our level of development these 
three minds know very little about one another and communicate with one another 
only under narcotics, in trance states, ecstatic states, in dreams, in hypnotic and 
mediumistic states. 
Besides our own minds and those which are in us, unknown to ourselves but 
indissolubly connected with us, we are also surrounded by many other minds which we 
also do not know. These minds we often feel, they are made up of our minds. We enter 
into our mind as their component parts, just as other minds enter into our mind. These 
minds are the good or evil spirits which help us or do us harm. Family, community, 
nation, race - any aggregate to which we belong (an aggregate unit undoubtedly 
possesses its own mind), every group of people which has its separate function and is 
aware of its inner