=== Tertium Organum (P. D. Ouspensky).pdf — CHUNK 18/18 ===
Chars: 18,349 | Offset: 751,117



[PAG 295]
Table of the four forms of the manifestation of consciousness - contd. 
First form 
Second form 
Third form 
Fourth form 
Kinds of Reflex. 
actions Unconscious 
responsive 
action to 
external 
irritation. 
Morality Unconscious 
actions (like the 
actions of a 
sleeping man). 
Forms of Potential 
consciousness consciousness. 
Consciousness 
in a latent state. 
Sleep. 
Consciousness 
as in a dream­
less sleep. 
Instinct. 
'Emotional' and 
expedient 
action, without 
consciousness 
of result. Seem 
ing conscious 
ness. Inability 
to use a lever. 
The beginning 
of the maternal, 
family and tribal 
instincts. 
Morality as the 
law of the life of 
the species and 
as a condition 
of evolution. 
Unconscious 
submission to 
the spirit of the 
species, 
manifesting 
through 
instincts. 
'Simple 
consciousness.' 
'It hurts.' But 
the impos 
sibility of 
saying: I am 
conscious that it 
hurts me.' 
Reflected state 
of conscious 
ness. Dreaming. 
Passive state of 
consciousness. 
Lever. 
Beginning of 
Possibility of 
conscious 
being conscious 
actions. 
of results. The 
Beginning of 
cause of actions 
actions with the 
- in the outer 
understanding 
world, in im 
of their cosmic 
pressions 
meaning and 
received from 
purpose. 
the outer world. 
Beginning of 
Impossibility of 
independent 
independent 
actions 
actions without 
proceeding from 
impulses 
oneself. MAGIC. 
coming from 
outside. 
Logical and con 
Return to the 
ventional 
law within 
division of good 
oneself. New 
and evil. Sub 
conscience. 
mission to the 
Emancipation 
group con 
from the sub 
sciousnesses of 
mission to 
family, clan, 
group con 
tribe, nation, 
sciousnesses. 
humanity, class, 
Consciousness 
party, etc. 
of oneself as an 
independent 
unit. 
Ability to think 
Beginning of 
of one's states of 
self-conscious 
consciousness. 
ness. Ecstatic 
Division of 'I' 
states. 
and not-'I'. 
Transitions to 
Active 
cosmic 
consciousness. 
consciousness. 
The moment 
when further 
evolution can 
only be 
conscious.

[PAG 296]
Table of the four forms of the manifestation of consciousness - contd. 
First form 
Second form 
Third form 
Fourth form 
Forms of Accumulation of 
knowledge 'traces' of pro 
duced reflexes. 
Appearance of 
instinct and 
accumulation 
of simple 
instincts. 
spirit. The 
Different Lower animal. 
beings Cells, tissues 
and organs of 
the body. One­
dimensional 
being. Vegetable 
or semi­
vegetable life. 
Personal 
knowledge. 
Impossibility of 
communicating 
experience. The 
beginning of the 
communication 
of experience in 
the education of 
the young. 
Higher animal. 
The human 
body. Two­
dimensional 
being. Absence 
of duality, 
disunion and 
disharmony. 
Animal life. 
Positivist 
Idealistic 
science and 
philosophy. 
philosophy. 
Mathematics of 
Materialism. 
the infinite, 
Spiritualistic 
Tertium 
philosophy. 
Organum', 
Dogmatic 
Mystical 
religions. 
religion. God 
Spiritism and 
and the World 
pseudo-
are one. One 
occultism. 
Spirit. The 
Sectarianism. 
sense of a living 
Dualism. 
and conscious 
Matter and 
universe. Union 
of all branches 
division of 
of knowledge 
different forms 
into one. Under 
of knowledge. 
standing of 
'Dharma', i.e. of 
laws of 
relativity. 
Man. Inner 
Beginning of 
disunion. The 
the transition to 
impossibility of 
a new type and a 
attaining inner 
new sense of 
harmony. 'The 
space. Victory of 
soul' as the 
consciousness. 
battlefield of the 
'Men of cosmic 
'spirit' and the 
consciousness.' 
'flesh'. 
Triumph of the 
Unconscious 
super-personal 
automatism. 
element. 
Absence of 
Conscious 
personal 
automatism. 
immortality. 
Attainment of 
inner unity and 
harmony. The 
soul as the 
centre of 
independent 
actions. 
Beginning of 
personal 
immortality.

[PAG 297]
Sensations are not differentiated. Consciousness is immersed in itself, in its 
work of feeding, assimilating and digesting food, and so on. This is the state 
of the cell, groups of cells, tissues and organs of an animal's body, of plants 
and lower organisms. In a man this is the 'instinctive mind'. 
Second form. A sense of two-dimensional space. This is the state of an 
animal. What is for us the third dimension is for it - motion. It already senses 
and feels, but does not think. Everything it sees seems to it equally real. The 
world for it is full of non-existent, illusory motion. Emotional life and flashes 
of thought in man. 
Third form. A sense of three-dimensional space. Logical thinking. A 
philosophical division of 'I' and 'Not I'. Dogmatic religions and dualistic 
spiritualism. Codified morality. Division of spirit and matter. Positivist 
science. Idea of evolution. Mechanical universe. Understanding of cosmic 
ideas as metaphors. 'Historical materialism', imperialism, socialism, and so 
on. Subjugation of the individual to society and law. Automatism. Death as 
the exhaustion of personality. Intellect and flashes of self-consciousness. 
Fourth form. Beginning of the understanding of four-dimensional space.
New conception of time. Possibility of more prolonged self-consciousness. 
Flashes of cosmic consciousness. The idea, and at times the sensation, of a 
living universe. Striving towards the miraculous and a sense of the infinite. 
Beginning of volitional self-consciousness and flashes of cosmic 
consciousness. 
Thus the third form embraces that 'man' who is studied by positivist
science. And the fourth form refers to 'man' who is already beginning to pass 
out of the field of vision of positivism and logical understanding. 
Evolution or culture 
The most important and most interesting questions which arise when we 
examine the idea of cosmic consciousness reduce themselves to the 
following: (1) Is the appearance of cosmic consciousness a matter for other 
generations in the remote future, i.e. must cosmic consciousness only come 
into being as a result of the process of evolution after centuries and 
millenniums, and will it then become common property or the property of the 
majority? and (2) Can cosmic consciousness appear now in modem man, i.e. 
even in very few men, as a

[PAG 298]
result of a certain education and self-education which will help to open up in 
man forces and faculties dormant in him; in other words, can it come as a 
result of a certain culture? 
It seems to me that in this connection we may dwell on the following 
propositions: The possibility of the appearance or development of cosmic 
consciousness belongs only to the few. But even in the case of those men in 
whom cosmic consciousness can manifest itself, this manifestation requires 
certain very definite conditions, both inner and outer, a certain culture, the 
education in man of elements akin to cosmic consciousness and the abolition 
of elements hostile to it. In other words cosmic consciousness cannot be 
created in a man who does not possess the rudiments of it. But even in a man 
who has this potentiality, it may be developed or, on the contrary, not 
developed, but stifled and destroyed. 
The distinguishing signs of men in whom cosmic consciousness may 
manifest are not studied at all. The first of these signs is a constant, or 
frequent, sensation that the world is not at all what it seems, that the principal 
and most important things in it are not at all those things which are regarded 
as of principal importance. Then there follows from this a sense of the 
unreality of the world and all its relationships, and a striving towards the 
'miraculous' which, in this case, is sensed as the only thing real and true. 
High mental culture, high intellectual achievements are not in the least an 
indispensable condition. Examples of many saints who were often not in the 
least intellectual men, but who nevertheless undoubtedly achieved cosmic 
consciousness, show that cosmic consciousness may develop on a purely 
emotional basis, i.e. in that case on the basis of religious emotion. In the same 
way cosmic consciousness may be achieved through creative emotions - in 
the case of painters, musicians, poets. In its highest manifestations art is a 
way to cosmic consciousness. 
But equally in all cases the opening up of cosmic consciousness demands a 
corresponding culture, a corresponding life. In all the examples given by
Bucke, in all the examples that could be added, one cannot find a single case 
where cosmic consciousness opened up in conditions of inner life opposed to 
it, i.e. at moments of absorption in external life with its struggle, its interests 
and its emotions. For the appearance of cosmic consciousness it is necessary
that the centre of gravity of the whole of man should be in self-consciousness 
and not in the sense of the external. 
If we imagine Dr Bucke himself being in conditions quite different from 
those in which he was at the moment of the manifestation of

[PAG 299]
cosmic consciousness, in all probability his illumination would not have come 
at all. 
He passed the evening reading poetry in the company of men of a high 
intellectual and emotional development and was returning home full of the 
thoughts and emotions of that evening.
But if, instead of this he had spent the evening playing cards in the 
company of men of everyday interests and everyday conversation, or at a 
political meeting; or if he had spent it standing at his lathe in a factory on a 
nightshirt; or if he had been busy writing a newspaper leader in which he did 
not believe himself and no one else would believe, one can say for certain that 
no manifestation of cosmic consciousness would have come to him, for it 
undoubtedly requires a very high degree of freedom and concentration on the 
inner world. 
This conclusion concerning the necessity of a special culture and definite 
inner and outer conditions does not at all mean that cosmic consciousness can 
manifest in any man placed in appropriate conditions. There are people ­
probably the overwhelming majority of modem humanity - who are totally
devoid of this possibility. And if this possibility is lacking, it cannot be 
created by any amount of culture, just as no amount of culture can make an 
animal speak in the human tongue. The possibility of manifestation of cosmic 
consciousness cannot be artificially grafted. A man is born with it or without 
it. This possibility may be suppressed or developed, but it cannot be created. 
Not everyone can learn to distinguish the true from the false. But even 
those who may have this ability will not get it as a free gift. It is the result of 
great labour, great work, demanding daring both in thought and feeling.

[PAG 300]
CONCLUSION  
In conclusion I would like to mention the wonderful and mysterious words of 
the Apocalypse and the apostle Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians which are put 
as the epigraph to this book. 
The Apocalyptic Angel swears that THERE SHALL BE TIME NO LONGER. 
We do not know what the author of the Apocalypse meant, but we do know 
those STATES OF THE SPIRIT, when time disappears. We know that it is 
precisely in this, in the change of the time-sense that the beginning of the 
fourth form of consciousness is expressed, the beginning of the transition to 
COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS. 
This and similar phrases give us a glimpse of the profound philosophical 
content of the Gospel teaching. And the understanding of the fact that the 
MYSTERY OF TIME is the FIRST mystery to be revealed, is the first step towards 
the development of cosmic consciousness by intellectual means. 
What was the meaning of this Apocalyptic phrase? Did it have the meaning 
we can attribute to it now - or was it simply an artistic rhetorical figure of 
speech, a chord accidentally sounded and continuing to sound for us through 
centuries and millenniums with such wonderfully strong and true tones? - we 
do not know, and we shall never know. But the words are beautiful. And we 
can accept them as a symbol of a remote and inaccessible truth. 
The apostle Paul's words are still more strange, still more striking in their 
mathematical exactness. (These words were pointed out to me in a book by
A. Dobrotoluboff, From the Invisible Book. The author sees in them a direct 
indication of the 'fourth measurement of space'.) 
Indeed, what can it mean? 
That ye, being rooted and grounded in love may be able to comprehend 
with all saints what is the BREADTH and LENGTH and 
DEPTH and HEIGHT.' 
First of all what does the comprehension of breadth and length and depth 
and height mean? What could it be but the comprehension of space? And we 
know already that the comprehension of the mysteries of space is the 
beginning of higher comprehension. 
The apostle says that those 'rooted and grounded in love' will comprehend 
with all saints what space is.

[PAG 301]
The question arises here: why should love give comprehension? That love 
leads to sanctity is clear. Love as the apostle Paul understands it (Chapter 13 
of the First Epistle to the Corinthians) is the highest of all emotions, the 
synthesis, the merging together of all higher emotions. There can be no doubt 
that it leads to sanctity. Sanctity is the state of the spirit freed from the duality
of man with its eternal disharmony of soul and body. In the language of the 
apostle Paul sanctity means even a little less than in our present language. He 
called all members of his church saints. In his language being a saint meant 
being righteous, moral, religious. We say that this is only the way to sanctity.
Sanctity is something different - something attained. But no matter whether 
we take it in his language or ours, sanctity is a superhuman quality. In the 
sphere of morality it corresponds to genius in the sphere of intellect. Love is 
the way to sanctity.
But the apostle Paul connects sanctity with KNOWLEDGE. The saints 
comprehend what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and he says 
that all - through love - can comprehend this with them. But what are they to 
comprehend? COMPREHEND SPACE. Because 'breadth and length and depth and 
height', translated into our language of shorter definitions, means space. 
And this last is strangest of all. 
How could the apostle Paul know and think that sanctity gives a new 
understanding of space? We know that it should give it, but HOW could he 
know this? 
None of his contemporaries connected the ideas of comprehension of 
space with sanctity. And there was as yet no question of 'space' at that time, at 
least not among the Romans and Greeks. Only now, after Kant and after 
having had access to the treasure-house of Eastern thought, we understand 
that it is impossible to pass to a new degree of consciousness without an 
expansion of the space-sense. 
But is this what the apostle Paul wanted to say - that strange man, a Roman 
official, persecutor of early Christianity who became its preacher,
philosopher, mystic, a man who 'saw God', a daring reformer and moralist of 
his time, who fought for the 'spirit' against the 'letter' and who was certainly 
not responsible for the fact that later he himself was understood not in the 
'spirit' but in the 'letter'. What did he want to say? - We do not know. 
But let us look at these words of the Apocalypse and the Epistles from the 
point of view of our ordinary 'positivist thinking' which at times graciously 
consents to admit the 'metaphorical meaning' of mysticism. What shall we 
see? 
WE SHALL SEE NOTHING.

[PAG 302]
The glimpse of mystery, revealed for a moment, will immediately vanish. 
It will be nothing but words without any meaning, with nothing in them to 
attract our weary attention which will flicker over them as it flickers over 
everything else. Indifferently we will turn the page and indifferently close the 
book. 
Yes, an interesting metaphor. But nothing more! And we do not realize that 
we rob ourselves, deprive our life of all beauty, all mystery, all meaning, and
then wonder why we are so bored and disgusted, why we have no wish to 
live; we do not see that we understand nothing around us; that brute force or 
deceit and falsification always win, and we have nothing with which to 
oppose them. 
THE METHOD IS NO GOOD. 
In its time 'positivism' came as something refreshing, sober, healthy and 
progressive, blazing new trails for thought. 
After the sentimental constructions of naive dualism it certainly was a big 
step forward. Positivism became a symbol of the progress of thought. 
But now we see that it inevitably leads to materialism. And in this form it 
arrests thought. From being revolutionary, persecuted, anarchistic, free­
thinking, positivism has become the basis of official science. It wears a 
uniform. Decorations have been bestowed upon it. Universities and 
academies have been placed at its disposal. It is recognized. It teaches. It 
rules over thought. 
But, having attained prosperity and success, positivism put an obstacle to 
the further development of thought. A Chinese wall of 'positivist' sciences 
and methods confronts free investigation. Everything rising above this wall is 
declared to be 'unscientific'. 
And in this form positivism, which before was a symbol of progress, has 
become conservative, reactionary.
In the realm of thought the existing order has become established, and 
struggle against it is already declared a crime. 
With surprising rapidity principles which only yesterday were the highest 
expression of radicalism in the realm of thought, are becoming props for 
opportunism in ideas, serve as blind-alleys arresting the progress of thought. 
Before our very eyes this is happening to the idea of evolution, upon which it 
is now possible to build anything one wants, and with the help of which one 
can refute everything. 
But free thought cannot be confined within any limits. 
The true motion which lies at the basis of everything is the motion of 
thought. True energy is the energy of consciousness. And truth itself is 
motion and can never come to rest, to the end of seeking.

[PAG 303]
EVERYTHING THAT ARRESTS THE MOVEMENT OF THOUGHT IS FALSE. 
Consequently the real, true progress of thought exists only in the widest 
possible striving towards knowledge, a striving which does not admit the 
possibility of resting on any forms of knowledge already found. The meaning
of life lies in eternal seeking, and only by seeking shall we ever find new 
reality.