=== Tertium Organum (P. D. Ouspensky).pdf — CHUNK 2/18 ===
Chars: 43,673 | Offset: 45,000

nton has two separate books The Fourth Dimension and A New Era of Thought; 
there are also three books of popular articles and fiction, Scientific Romances, where 
he expounds the same ideas.

[PAG 24]
There is in so many books in which the subject is treated a certain air of 
despondency - as if this space apprehension were a kind of veil which shut us off 
from nature. But there is no need to adopt this feeling. . . . [We must recognize] the 
fact that it is by means of space that we apprehend what is. 
Space is the instrument of the mind. 
Very often a statement which seems to be very deep and abstruse and hard to 
grasp, is simply the form into which deep thinkers have thrown a very simple and 
practical observation. And for the present, let us look on Kant's great doctrine of 
space from a practical point of view, and it comes to this - it is important to develop 
the space sense, for it is the means by which we think about real things. 
Now according to Kant [continues Hinton], the space sense or the intuition of 
space, is the most fundamental power of the mind. But I do not find anywhere a 
systematic and thoroughgoing education of the space sense. ... It is left to be 
organized by accident. . . . [And yet a special development of space-sense makes 
perfectly clear and simple] a whole series of new conceptions. . . . 
Fichte, Schelling, Hegel have developed certain tendencies of Kant and have 
written remarkable books. But the true successors of Kant are Gauss and 
Lobatchewski. 
For if our intuition of space is the means by which we apprehend, then it follows 
that there may be different kinds of intuitions of space. . . . This intuition of space 
must be coloured, so to speak, by the conditions (of the mental activity) of the being 
which uses it. ... 
By a remarkable analysis the great geometers above mentioned have shown that 
space is not limited as ordinary experience would seem to inform us, but that we are 
quite capable of conceiving different kinds of space.* 
Hinton devised a complicated system for educating and developing space-sense by 
means of exercises with a series of different coloured cubes. The books already 
mentioned are devoted to the exposition of this system. In my opinion Hinton's 
exercises are interesting from the point of view of theory, but can have a practical 
significance only in those cases where people have the same mental make-up as 
Hinton. 
According to Hinton, his system of mental exercises should, first of all, lead to the 
development of the ability to visualize things, not as the eye sees them, i.e. not in 
perspective, but as they are geometrically; for example, they should teach one to 
visualize the cube from all sides at once. If one acquires this ability of visualization, 
not in perspective, it should, in its turn, greatly widen the bounds of the activity of our 
consciousness, thereby creating new concepts and intensifying our capacity for 
drawing analogies. 
* C. H. Hinton, A New Era of Thought, London, George Alien & Unwin, 1910.

[PAG 25]
Kant established the fact that an expansion of knowledge under the existing conditions 
of perception will not bring us any nearer to things in themselves. But there are theories 
asserting that, if desired, it is possible to change the very conditions of perception and 
in this way approach to the real essence of things. In the above-mentioned books 
Hinton attempts to unite together the scientific grounds of such theories. 
Our space as we ordinarily think of it is conceived as limited - not in extent, but in a 
certain way which can only be realized when we think of our ways of measuring 
space objects. It is found that there are only three independent directions in which a 
body can be measured - it must have height, length and breadth, but it has no more 
than these dimensions. If any other measurement be taken in it, this new measurement 
will be found to be compounded of the old measurements. 
It is impossible to find a point in the body which could not be arrived at by 
travelling in combinations of the three directions already taken. 
But why should space be limited to three independent directions? 
Geometers have found that there is no reason why bodies should be thus limited. 
As a matter of fact all the bodies which we can measure are thus limited. So we 
come to this conclusion, that the space which we use for conceiving ordinary objects 
in the world is limited to three dimensions. But it might be possible for there to be 
beings living in a world such that they would conceive a space of four dimensions. . . 
. 
It is possible to say a great deal about space of higher dimensions than our own, 
and to work out analytically many problems which suggest themselves. But can we 
conceive four-dimensional space in the same way in which we can conceive our own 
space? Can we think of a body in four dimensions as a unit having properties in the 
same way as we think of a body having a definite shape in the space with which we 
are familiar? 
There is really no more difficulty in conceiving four-dimensional shapes, when we 
go about it in the right way, than in conceiving the idea of solid shapes, nor is there 
any mystery at all about it. 
When the faculty [of apprehending in four dimensions] is acquired - or rather 
when it is brought into consciousness, for it exists in everyone in imperfect form - a 
new horizon opens. The mind acquires a development of power, and in this use of 
ampler space as a mode of thought, a path is opened by using that very truth which, 
when first stated by Kant, seemed to close the mind within such fast limits. Our 
perception is subject to the conditions of being in space. But space is not limited as 
we at first think. 
The next step after having formed this power of conception in ampler space, is to 
investigate nature and see what phenomena are to be explained by four-dimensional 
relations. . . . 
The thought of the past ages has used the conception of a three-dimensional space, 
and by that means has classified many phenomena and has obtained rules for dealing 
with matters of great practical utility. The path which opens immediately before us 
in the future is that of applying the conception of four-dimensional space to the 
phenomena of nature, and of investigating what can be found out by this new means 
of apprehension.

[PAG 26]
To expand our apprehension it is important to separate as far as possible the self­
elements, i.e. the personal elements introduced by us into everything we apprehend, 
from that which is being apprehended, so that our attention may not be distracted (onto 
ourselves) from the properties of what we actually perceive. 
Only 'by getting rid of the self-elements' in our perception do 'we put ourselves in a 
position in which we can propound sensible questions'. Only 'by getting rid of the 
notion of its circular motion round the earth [i.e. round us - a self-element] do we 
prepare our way to study the sun.' 
The worst about a self-element [in perception] is, that its presence is never dreamed of 
till it is got rid of. ... 
[In order to understand what the self-element in our perception means, let us] 
imagine ourselves to be translated suddenly to another part of the universe, and to 
find there intelligent beings, and to hold conversation with them. If we told them that 
we came from a world, and were to describe the sun to them, saying that it was a 
bright, hot body which moved round us, they would reply: You have told us 
something about the sun, but you have also told us something about yourselves. 
Therefore, if we wish to know something about the sun we must first of all get rid of 
the self-element introduced into our apprehension of the sun by the motion round it of 
the earth, on which we are. 
'One of our serious pieces of work' in the education and development of space-sense 
'will be to get rid of the self-elements in the knowledge of arrangement [of objects]'. 
What the relation of our universe, or our space, to the four-dimensional space may 
be, is altogether undetermined. 
The real relationship will require a great deal of study to apprehend, and when 
apprehended will seem as natural to us as the position of the earth among the other 
planets does to us now. 
I would divide studies of... [arrangement] into two classes: those which create the 
faculty of arrangement, and those which use it and exercise it. Mathematics exercises 
it, but I do not think it creates it; and unfortunately, in mathematics as it is now often 
taught, the pupil is at once launched into a vast system of symbols [without being 
given the possibility of grasping their meaning and significance]. 
Of the possible units which will serve [for the study of arrangement], I take the 
cube; and I have found that whenever I took any other unit I got wrong, puzzled and 
lost my way. With the cube one does not get along very fast, but everything is 
perfectly obvious and simple, and builds up into a whole of which every pan is 
evident. . . . 
Our work will then be this: a study, by means of cubes, of the facts of arrangement. 
And the process of learning will be an active one of actually

[PAG 27]
putting up the cubes. In this way ... we bring . . . [the mind] into contact 
with nature.* 
Now, taking into consideration all that has been said, let us try to establish 
exactly how we understand those aspects of our perception of which Kant 
speaks. 
What is space? 
Taken as an object, i.e. visualized as outside our consciousness, space is for 
us the form of the universe or the form of matter in the universe. 
Space possesses infinite extension in all directions. But, at the same time, 
we can measure it in three independent directions only: length, breadth and 
height. We call these directions dimensions of space and say that our space 
possesses three dimensions, that it is three-dimensional. 
By an independent direction we mean, in this case, a line lying at right 
angles to another line. 
Our geometry (i.e. the science of measuring the earth, or matter in space)
knows only three such lines which lie simultaneously at right angles to one 
another and are not parallel in relation to each other. 
Why are there only three and not ten or fifteen? 
This we do not know. 
Moreover, one other fact is significant - either by virtue of some 
mysterious quality of the universe, or because of the limitations of our mental 
apparatus, we cannot visualize more than three perpendiculars. 
But we say that space is infinite. Therefore, since the first condition of 
infinity is infinity in all directions and in all possible respects, we must 
assume that space has an infinite number of dimensions, that is, assume the 
possibility of an infinite number of lines perpendicular and not parallel to one 
another. And in addition we have to assume that for some reason we know 
only three of these lines. 
This is the aspect in which the question of higher dimensions presents itself 
to our ordinary consciousness. 
All the same, since we are incapable of constructing more than three 
perpendiculars, we are forced to admit that, even if the three-dimensionality
of our space is merely conditional, the limitedness of our space as regards 
geometrical possibilities is an unquestionable fact. But of course, if these 
properties of space are created by certain attributes of our own, then it 
follows that the limitation is also in ourselves. 
* C. H. Hinton, A New Era of Thought, London, George Alien & Unwin, 1910.

[PAG 28]
No matter what this limitation depends on, the fact is that it exists. 
A given point can be the vertex of only eight independent tetrahedrons. 
From a given point only three perpendicular and non-parallel lines can be 
traced. 
Starting from this, we determine the dimensionality of space by the number 
of lines it is possible to trace in it which would lie at right angles to one 
another. 
On a line there cannot be a perpendicular, that is, another line. It is one­
dimensional space. 
On a surface, two perpendiculars are possible. It is two-dimensional space. 
In 'space', there are three perpendiculars. It is three-dimensional space.
The idea of the fourth dimension arose from the assumption that, in 
addition to the three dimensions known to our geometry, there exists a fourth, 
for some reason inaccessible and unknown to us, i.e. that in addition to the 
three perpendiculars known to us a mysterious fourth perpendicular is 
possible. In practice this assumption is based on the consideration that the 
world contains many things and phenomena about whose real existence there 
can be no doubt, but which are utterly beyond being measured in length, 
breadth and height and lie, as it were, outside three-dimensional space. 
We may take as really existing that which produces a certain action, has 
certain functions, represents the cause of something else. 
That which does not exist cannot produce any action, has no function, 
cannot be a cause. 
But there are different kinds of existence. There is the physical existence, 
recognized by actions and functions of a certain kind; and there is the 
metaphysical existence, recognized by its actions and its functions. 
A house exists, and the idea of good and evil exists. But they do not exist in
the same way. One and the same method of proving existence cannot serve to 
prove the existence of a house and the existence of an idea. A house is a 
physical fact, an idea is a metaphysical fact. Both the physical and the 
metaphysical facts exist, but they exist differently.
In order to prove the idea of the division of good and evil - i.e. a 
metaphysical fact - I must prove its possibility. This will be sufficient. But if I 
prove that a house, i.e. a physical fact, can exist, it does not at all mean that it 
actually does exist. To prove that a man can own a house is no proof that he 
actually owns it.

[PAG 29]
Moreover, our relation to an idea and to a house is quite different. By 
means of a certain effort a house can be destroyed - it can be burned or 
demolished. The house will cease to exist. But try to destroy an idea by
effort. The more you fight against it, the more you argue, refute, ridicule it, 
the more the idea will grow, spread and gain strength. On the other hand, 
silence, oblivion, non-doing, 'non-resistance' will annihilate, or at any rate
weaken the idea. But silence, oblivion, will not harm a house or a stone. It is 
clear that the existence of a house and the existence of an idea are different 
existences. 
We know a great many of such different existences. A book exists and the 
contents of a book exist. Notes exist, and the music they contain exists. A 
coin exists and the purchasing value of a coin exists. A word exists and the 
energy contained in it exists. 
On the one hand we see a series of physical facts, on the other, a series of 
metaphysical facts. 
There are facts of the first kind and facts of the second kind; they both 
exist, but they exist differently. 
From the ordinary positivist view it will appear very naive to speak of the 
purchasing value of a coin separately from the coin; of the energy of a word 
separately from the word; of the contents of a book separately from the book, 
and so on. We all know that this is only 'a manner of speech', that actually the 
purchasing value, the energy of a word, the contents of a book, have no 
existence; they are only concepts by means of which we designate a series of 
phenomena in some way connected with the coin, the word, the book, but 
really quite separate from them. 
But is it so? 
We decided not to accept anything as data and therefore we must not reject 
anything as data. 
We see in things not only an outer aspect but an inner content. We know 
that this inner content constitutes an inalienable part of things, usually their 
main essence. And quite naturally we ask ourselves where it is and what it 
represents. We see that this inner content is not in our space. So we conceive 
the idea of a 'higher space', possessing more dimensions than ours. Our space
then becomes a pan of a higher space, as it were, i.e. we begin to suppose that 
we know, sense and measure only a part of space, that part which is
measurable in length, breadth and height. 
It was said earlier that, as a rule, we regard space as the form of the universe 
or the form of matter in the universe. To make this more clear - it can be said 
that a 'cube' is the form of matter in a cube; a

[PAG 30]
'sphere' is the form of matter in a sphere; 'space' - an infinite sphere - is the form of all 
the matter contained in the universe. In The Secret Doctrine, H. P. Blavatsky says this 
about space: 
The superficial absurdity of assuming that space itself is measurable in any direction 
is of little consequence. The familiar phrase [the fourth dimension of space] can only 
be an abbreviation of the fuller form - the 'fourth dimension of matter, in space'. . . . 
The progress of evolution may be destined to introduce us to new characteristics of 
matter.* 
But the formula denning 'space' as the 'form of matter in the universe' suffers from 
one defect, namely, it introduces the concept of 'matter', i.e. an unknown. 
I have already spoken of the blind alley, x = y, y = x, to which all attempts at a 
physical definition of matter lead. Psychological definitions lead to the same. 
In his well-known book. The Physiology of the Soul, A. I. Hertzen says: 
We call matter everything that, directly or indirectly, offers resistance to motion 
directly or indirectly produced by us, manifesting in this a remarkable analogy with 
our passive states. 
And we call force (motion) that which, directly or indirectly, communicates 
movement to us or to other bodies, manifesting in this the greatest resemblance to our 
active states. 
Consequently, 'matter' and 'motion' are, as it were, projections of our active and 
passive stages. It is clear that the passive state can only be defined by means of the 
active, and the active by means of the passive. The result is once more two unknowns 
defining one another. 
E. Douglas Fawcett puts it very well when he speaks of matter in his article 
'Idealism and the Problem of Nature' in The Quest (April 1910): 
Matter (like 'Force') does not present any difficulty at all. We know all about it, for 
the very good reason that we have invented it. . . . 'Matter' is a creation of our 
conceiving; a mere way of thinking about sensible objects; 
a mental substitute for concrete but unmanageably complex facts. . . . 
Strictly speaking. Matter exists only as a concept. . . . Truth to tell, the character of 
Matter, even when treated only as a conception, is so un-obvious, that the majority of 
persons are unable to tell exactly what they mean by it. 
' H. P. Blavatsky, The Secret Doctrine, London and New York, Theosophical 
Publishing Society, 3rd edn, 1893, vol. 1, p. 271.

[PAG 31]
One important point is brought out here: matter and force are only logical 
concepts, i.e. only terms adopted to designate a long series of diverse facts. It 
is difficult for us, brought up on 'physics', to understand this. But in reality ­
who has ever seen matter or force? We see things, we see phenomena. 
Matter separately from the substance of which a given thing is made or 
consists we have never seen and never shall see. And, a given substance is 
not matter, it is wood, or iron, or stone. In the same way, we shall never see 
force separately from action. What does this mean? It means that matter and 
force are concepts just as abstract as 'value' or 'labour', as the 'purchasing
value' of a coin, as the 'contents' of a book. It means that matter is 'such stuff 
as dreams are made on'. And, just as we can never touch this 'stuff', and see it 
only in dreams, so we can never touch, see, hear or photograph physical 
matter separately from things. Perfectly or imperfectly, we know things and 
phenomena, but we shall never know matter and force apart from things and 
phenomena. 
Matter is as much an abstract concept as truth, good or evil. 
Matter, or any part of matter, cannot be put into a chemical retort or a 
crucible, just as 'Egyptian Darkness' cannot be sold in small bottles. But they 
say that 'Egyptian Darkness' in the form of black powder is sold on Mount 
Athos or elsewhere, so perhaps someone has also seen matter after all. 
In order to find the right approach to these questions it is necessary to have 
a certain preparation or a great inner flair. Unfortunately people embark with 
too great an ease on discussions about fundamental questions of the structure 
of the world. 
A man readily admits his incompetence in music or in higher mathematics, 
or in the art of ballet dancing, but he always reserves the right to have an 
opinion and voice a judgment on questions referring to 'fundamental 
principles'. 
To talk with such people is very difficult. 
For, how will you answer a man who looks at you in perplexity, taps his 
finger on the table and says, 'This is matter, I know, I feel it. How can this be 
an abstract concept?' It is just as difficult to answer him as it is difficult to 
answer the man who says: 'But I see for myself that the sun rises and sets!' 
To return to the question of space, we must at all events not introduce 
unknown quantities into its definition. We must define it with the help of the 
two data we already decided to accept at the very beginning. The world and 
our inner life are the two facts we decided to recognize as existing.

[PAG 32]
By the world we mean the combination of the causes of all our sensations 
in general. 
By the material world we mean the combination of the causes of a definite 
series of sensations, those of sight, hearing, touch, smell, taste, sensations of 
weight, of mass, and so on. 
Space is either a property of the world or a property of our cognition of the 
world. 
Three-dimensional space is either a property of the material world or a 
property of our perception of the material world. 
So the question is this: how must we approach the study of space?

[PAG 33]
CHAPTER 3  
What can we learn about the fourth dimension by studying geometrical relationships 
within our space? What should be the relationship of a three-dimensional body to a 
four-dimensional one? A four-dimensional body as the trace of the movement of a 
three-dimensional body in a direction not contained in it. A four-dimensional body as 
composed of an infinite number of three-dimensional bodies. A three-dimensional 
body as a section of a four-dimensional one. Parts of bodies and whole bodies in 
three and in four dimensions. Incommensurability of a three-dimensional and a four­
dimensional body. A material atom as a section of a four-dimensional line. 
If we examine the profound difference that exists between a point and a line, between a 
line and a surface, between a surface and a solid, i.e. the difference between the laws 
which govern a point and a line, a line and a surface and so on, and the difference of 
phenomena which are possible in a point, a line, a surface, we shall realize how many 
things, new and incomprehensible for us, lie in the fourth dimension. 
As within a point it is impossible to visualize a line and the laws of the line, as 
within a line it is impossible to visualize a surface and the laws of a surface, as within a 
surface it is impossible to visualize a solid and understand the laws of a solid, so within 
our space it is impossible to visualize a body possessing more than three dimensions 
and impossible to understand the laws of the existence of such a body. 
But, by studying the mutual relations between a point, a line, a surface and a solid 
we begin to learn something about the fourth dimension, i.e. about four-dimensional 
space. We begin to learn what it can be as compared with our three-dimensional space, 
and what it cannot be. 
This last we learn first of all. And it is especially important, because it frees us from 
a great many deep-rooted illusions, which are very harmful for right knowledge. 
We learn what cannot be in four-dimensional space, and this enables us to establish 
what can be there. 
In his book, The Fourth Dimension, Hinton makes an interesting remark in 
connection with the method which helps us to approach the question of higher 
dimensions. He says: 
Space itself bears within it relations of which we can determine it as related to other 
[higher] space.

[PAG 34]
For within space are given the conceptions of point and line, line and 
plane, plane and solid, which really involve the relation of space to a higher 
space.* 
Let us try to examine these relations within our space and see what 
conclusions may be drawn from a study of them. 
We know that our geometry regards a line as the trace of the movement of a 
point; a surface, as the trace of the movement of a line; 
and a solid as the trace of the movement of a surface. On this basis we may
ask ourselves the question: is it not possible to regard a 'four-dimensional 
body' as the trace of the movement of a three-dimensional body? 
What then is this movement and in what direction? 
A point, moving in space and leaving the trace of its motion in the form of 
a line, moves in a direction not contained in itself, for in a point there is no 
direction. 
A line, moving in space and leaving the trace of its motion in the form of a 
surface, moves in a direction not contained in itself, because should it move 
in a direction contained in itself, it would always remain a line. 
A surface, moving in space and leaving the trace of its motion in the form 
of a solid, also moves in a direction not contained in itself. If it should move 
in one of the directions contained in itself, it would always remain a surface. 
In order to leave a trace of its motion in the form of a 'solid' or a three­
dimensional figure, it must move away from itself, move in a direction which 
does not exist within it. 
By analogy with all this, a solid, in order to leave the trace of its motion in 
the form of a four-dimensional figure, must also move in a direction not 
contained in itself; in other words, a solid must get out of itself, away from 
itself. Later, it will be established how we should understand this. 
In the meantime we may say that the direction of motion in the fourth 
dimension lies outside all those directions which are possible in a three­
dimensional figure.
We regard a line as an infinite number of points; a surface as an infinite 
number of lines; a solid as an infinite number of surfaces. 
By analogy with this it is possible to assume that a four-dimensional body
should be regarded as an infinite number of three-dimensional bodies, and 
four-dimensional space as an infinite number of three-dimensional spaces. 
* C. H. Hinton, The Fourth Dimension, London, 1912, reprinted Arno Press, New 
York, 1976, p. 3.

[PAG 35]
Further, we know that a line is limited by points, a surface is limited by
lines, a solid is limited by surfaces. 
It is possible, therefore, that four-dimensional space is limited by three­
dimensional bodies. 
We may say that a line is the distance between points; a surface, the 
distance between lines; a solid, the distance between surfaces. 
Or we can put it this way: a line separates two or several points from one 
another (a straight line is the shortest distance between two points); a surface 
separates two or more lines from one another; a solid separates several 
surfaces from one another. Thus, a cube separates six flat surfaces, which we 
call its sides, from one another. 
A line binds several points into a certain whole (a straight, a curved, an 
irregular line); a surface binds several lines into a certain whole (a square, a 
triangle); a solid binds several surfaces into a certain whole (a cube, a 
pyramid). 
It is more than possible that four-dimensional space is the distance between 
a number of solids, separating yet at the same time binding into some 
incomprehensible whole, those solids which to us appear to be separate from 
one another. 
Moreover, we regard a point as a section of a line; a line as a section of a 
surface; a surface as a section of a solid. 
By analogy with this it may be possible to regard a solid (a cube, a sphere, 
a pyramid) as a section of a four-dimensional body; and the whole of three­
dimensional space as a section of four-dimensional space. 
If every three-dimensional body is the section of a four-dimensional one, 
then every point of a three-dimensional body is the section of a four­
dimensional line. An 'atom' of a physical body may be regarded, not as 
something material, but as the intersection of a four-dimensional line by the 
plane of our consciousness. 
The view of a three-dimensional body as a section of a four-dimensional 
one leads us to the thought that many three-dimensional bodies, which appear 
separate for us, may be sections or parts of one four-dimensional body.
A simple example will illustrate this idea. If we imagine a horizontal plane, 
intersecting the top of a tree in a direction parallel to the earth, then on this 
plane the sections of the branches will appear separate and quite unconnected 
with one another. And yet in our space, from our point of view, these are 
sections of the branches of one tree, together forming one top, fed by one 
common root and casting one shadow. 
Or again, another interesting example illustrating the same idea is

[PAG 36]
given by the theosophical writer, C. W. Leadbeater, in one of his books. If we 
touch the surface of a table with our five fingertips of one hand, there will be 
then on the surface of the table only five circles, and on this surface it is 
impossible to have any idea either of the hand or of the man to whom the 
hand belongs. There will be five separate circles on the table's surface. How, 
from these, is it possible to picture a man, with all the richness of his physical 
and psychological life? It is impossible. Our relation to the four-dimensional 
world may be exactly the same as the relationship between that consciousness 
which sees the five circles on the table and the man. We see only 'fingertips'; 
that is why the fourth dimension is incomprehensible for us. 
In addition, we know that it is possible to draw an image of a three­
dimensional body on a plane, that it is possible to draw a cube, a polyhedron, 
or a sphere. But it will not be a real cube or a real sphere, but only the 
projection of a cube or a sphere on a plane. So it may be that we are justified 
in thinking that the three-dimensional bodies we see in our space are images, 
so to speak, of four-dimensional bodies, incomprehensible for us.

[PAG 37]
CHAPTER 4  
In what direction may the fourth dimension lie? What is motion? Two kinds of 
movement - movement in space and movement in time -contained in every motion. 
What is time? Present past and future. Wundt on sense-cognition. Groping through 
life. Why we do not see the past and the future. A new extension in space and motion 
in that space. Two ideas contained in the concept of time. Time as the fourth 
dimension of space. Impossibility of understanding the idea of the fourth dimension 
without the idea of motion. The idea of motion and 'time-sense'. 'Time-sense' as the 
limit (surface) of space sense. Riemann's idea of the translation of time into space in 
the fourth dimension. Hinton on the law of surfaces. 'Ether' as a surface. 
From the analogy between the relation of lower dimensional figures to higher
dimensional figures we have established the fact that a four-dimensional body 
may be regarded as the trace of the movement of a three-dimensional body in 
a direction not contained in it, i.e. that the direction of motion in the fourth 
dimension lies outside all the directions possible in a three-dimensional 
space. 
What can this direction be? 
In order to answer this question we must see whether we know of any 
movement in a direction not contained in three-dimensional space. 
We know that every movement in space is accompanied by what we may
call movement in time. We know, in addition, that even without moving in 
space, everything that exists moves eternally in time. 
And, equally in all cases, whether we speak of motion or of absence of 
motion, we have in mind the idea of what was before, what is now, what will 
be after. In other words, we have in mind the idea of time. The idea of 
motion, whatever this motion may be, as well as the idea of absence of 
motion, is indissolubly linked with the idea of time. Any motion or absence 
of motion takes place in time and cannot take place outside of time. 
Consequently, before speaking about what motion is, we must answer the 
question: what is time? 
Time is the greatest and the most difficult riddle which confronts mankind. 
Kant regards time in the same way as he regards space, as a purely 
subjective form of our perception. He says that, conditioned as we are

[PAG 38]
by the properties of our perceiving apparatus, we create time as a 
convenience for perception of the outside world. Reality is continuous and 
constant. But in order to be able to perceive it, we must break it up into 
separate moments, i.e. represent it to ourselves as an endless series of 
separate moments, out of which one and one only exists for us. In other 
words, we perceive reality as though through a narrow slit. What we see 
through this slit, we call the present; what we saw but see no longer, we call 
the past; and what we do not see at all but expect to see, we call the future. 
Examining each phenomenon as the outcome of another one, or several 
others, and this in its turn, as the cause of still another, or others, i.e. 
examining all phenomena in their mutual functional relationship, we, by this 
very fact, examine them in time because, quite clearly and distinctly, we first 
visualize the cause and then the effect - first the action, then its function - and 
we cannot think of it otherwise. So for us the idea of time is essentially 
connected with the idea of causation and functional interdependence. 
Causation cannot exist without time, just as motion or absence of motion 
cannot exist without time. 
But our conception of our 'existence in time' is incredibly muddled and 
hazy. 
First of all let us examine our relation to the past, the present and the 
future. Usually, we consider the past as no longer existing. It has gone ­
vanished - changed, has become transformed into something else. The future 
does not exist either. It is not yet. It has not yet come, it is not yet formed. By
the present we mean the moment of transition from the future into the past, 
i.e. the moment of the transition of a phenomenon from one non-existence 
into another. Only during this brief moment does a phenomenon really exist 
for us; before, it exists as a potentiality, and after, it exists as a memory. But 
in actual fact this brief moment is a fiction. It has no dimension. On the 
contrary, we have every right to say that the present does not exist. We can 
never catch it. That which we manage to catch is always already past! 
If we stop at that we shall be forced to admit that the world does not exist. 
The only thing that exists is some phantasmagoria of illusions, flashing up
then vanishing. 
As a rule we fail to realize this, and do not see that our usual view of time 
leads to utter absurdity.
Imagine a foolish traveller going from one town to another and finding
himself half way between the two towns. The foolish traveller thinks that the 
town he left last week no longer exists now, that only the memory of it 
remains; the walls are demolished, the towers have

[PAG 39]
fallen, the inhabitants have died or run away. And the town where he is due 
to arrive in a few days' time does not exist now either, but is being hastily
built for his coming and, on the day of his arrival, will be ready, peopled and 
in working order, but on the day following his departure will be destroyed
just like the first. 
This is exactly the way we think about things in time - everything passes, 
nothing returns! Spring is over, it exists no longer. Autumn has not yet come, 
it does not exist as yet. 
What then does exist? 
The present. 
But the present is a moment impossible to capture, it is continuously
melting into the past. 
Thus, strictly speaking, the past, the future and the present do not exist for 
us. Nothing exists! Yet we live, feel, think - and something surrounds us. 
Consequently, there must be some fault in our customary attitude to time. We 
must try to find this fault. 
At the very beginning we accepted the fact that something exists. We 
called this something the world. How can the world exist if it does not exist 
in the past, the present and the future? 
As deduced from our ordinary viewpoint of time, we make the world 
appear like an incandescent streamer of fireworks perpetually shooting up, 
each spark of which flashes for a moment then is instantly extinguished, 
never to appear again. Flashes follow one another in close succession; the 
number of sparks is infinite and the whole produces the effect of flame, 
although in reality it has no existence. 
Autumn has not yet come. It will be, but now it is not. And we never stop 
to think how that which is not can appear. 
We move on a plane and accept as actually existing only the small circle 
illumined by our consciousness. Everything that lies beyond this circle and 
beyond our field of vision we reject, and deny its very existence. We move 
on the plane in one direction. This direction we consider eternal and infinite. 
But any direction perpendicular to it, any lines we may cross, we refuse to 
accept as eternal and infinite. We think that they vanish into non-existence as 
soon as we have crossed them, and that the lines in front of us have not yet 
emerged from non-existence. If we suppose that we move along a sphere,
along its equator or one of its parallels, we shall find that we always accept 
only one meridian as really existing; those behind us have already dis­
appeared, those in front have not yet come into being.
We go along like a blind man who, with his stick, feels the paving stones, 
the lamp-posts and the walls of the houses and believes in the

[PAG 40]
real existence of only those things he is touching now. What he has passed 
has vanished never to return! What he has not yet reached does not exist. The 
blind man remembers the road he has covered; he expects to find a road in 
front; but he does not see either forward or backward, because he does not 
see anything; and also because his instrument of cognition - his stick - has a 
certain, very small length, and beyond this stick non-existence begins for him. 
In one of his books Wundt draws attention to the fact that our vaunted five 
sense-organs are merely feelers by means of which we touch the world 
around us. We live by 'feel' - by groping. We never see anything. We always 
grope for everything. With the help of the telescope, the telegraph, the 
telephone we perhaps lengthen our feelers, so to speak, but we do not begin 
to see. To say that we see would be possible only if we knew the past and the 
present. But we do not see and therefore can never convince ourselves of the 
existence of that which we cannot feel. 
Here we have the reason why we regard as really existing only the circle 
which our feelers can grasp at a given moment. Beyond this circle there is 
only darkness and non-existence. 
But have we the right to think in this way? 
Imagine a consciousness not limited by the conditions of sense-perception. 
Such a consciousness can rise above the plane on which we move; it can see 
far beyond the bounds of the circle illumined by our ordinary consciousness; 
it can see that not only does the line along which we move exist, but also all 
other lines perpendicular to it which we now cross, or have ever crossed 
before, or shall cross later. Rising above the plane this consciousness will be 
able to see the plane, make sure that it actually is a plane and not only a line. 
Then it will be able to see the past and the future lying side by side and 
existing simultaneously. 
Consciousness not limited by the conditions of sense-perception may out­
distance the foolish traveller, climb a hill, and see from afar the town towards 
which he is going. It can convince itself that this town is not being newly
built for his arrival but already exists by itself, quite independently of him. It 
will be able to look back and see on the horizon the towers of the town which 
the traveller left, and convince itself that the towers have not fallen down, 
that the town continues to stand and live as it stood and lived before the 
coming of the traveller. 
Such a consciousness may rise above the plane of time and see the spring
behind and the autumn in front, see simultaneously the unfolding flowers and 
the ripening fruit. It may cure the blind man of

[PAG 41]
his blindness and make him see the road he has covered and the road that lies before 
him. 
The past and the future cannot be non-existent, for, if they do not exist, the present 
does not exist either. They must exist together somewhere, only we do not see them. 
The present, as opposed to the past and the future, is the most unreal of all 
unrealities. 
We must admit that the past, the present and the future do not differ from one 
another in any way, that the only thing that exists is the present - the Eternal Now of 
Indian philosophy. But we do not see it, because at every given moment we are only 
aware of a small fragment of this present; this fragment we regard as actually existing, 
and deny real existence to everything else. 
Once we accept this, our view concerning everything that surrounds us must 
undergo a great change. 
Usually we regard time as an abstraction made by us when observing existent 
motion; that is to say, we think that in observing motion or changes in the relations 
between things, and comparing the relations which existed before, which exist now and 
which may exist in the future, we evolve the idea of time. We shall see later how far 
this view is correct. 
Moreover, our idea of time is composed of the concept of the past, the concept of the 
present and the concept of the future. 
The concepts of the past and the present, although very vague, are uniform. But as 
regards the future there is a great variety of views. 
It is essential for us to examine these theories of the future as they exist in the mind 
of modern man. 
There are two main theories - that of a predestined future and that of a free future. 
The theory of predestination is argued in the following way: it is asserted that every 
future event is the result of past events and is such as it is and no other, owing to a 
certain direction of the forces contained in the preceding events. In other words, this 
means that future events are entirely contained in the preceding ones, and if we were to 
know the force and direction of all the events which took place before the present 
moment, i.e. if we knew all the past, then, through this very fact we would know all the 
future. And it is true that if we have a thorough knowledge of the present moment in all 
its details, we may, at times, actually forecast the future. But if our forecast does not 
come true we say that we did not know everything there was, and we actually see in the 
past some cause which had escaped our observation. 
The idea of a free future is based on the possibility of deliberate