=== Tertium Organum (P. D. Ouspensky).pdf — CHUNK 12/18 ===
Chars: 43,140 | Offset: 488,971

cubes], we first 
of all learn it by starting from a particular cube, and learning how all the others come 
with regard to that. We learn the block with regard to this axis, so that we can 
mentally conceive the disposition of every cube as it comes regarded from one point 
of view. Next we suppose ourselves to be in another cube at the extremity of another 
axis; and looking from this axis, we learn the aspects of all the cubes, and so on. . . . 
In this way we get a knowledge of the block of cubes. Now to get a knowledge of 
humanity ... it is by acting with regard to the view of each individual that a 
knowledge is obtained. 
[An egotist may be compared with a man who knows the cube only from one 
point of view.]

[PAG 198]
Those who feel superficially with a great many people, are like those learners who 
have a slight acquaintance with a block of cubes from many points of view. Those 
who have some deep attachments, are like those who know them well from one or 
two points of view. . . . 
And after all, perhaps, the difference between the good and the rest of us, lies in 
the former being aware. There is something outside them which draws them to it, 
which they see while we do not.* 
Just as it is wrong in relation to oneself to evaluate everything from the point of 
view of one emotion, opposing it to all the rest, so it is wrong in relation to the world 
and to people to evaluate everything from the point of view of some one accidental 'I' 
of one's own, opposing the self of a given moment to all the rest. 
Thus the problem of right emotional knowledge is to feel in relation to people and 
the world from a point of view other than the personal. And the wider the circle for 
which a given person feels, the deeper the knowledge which his emotions give. But not 
all emotions are capable in equal measure of being freed from self-elements. There are 
emotions which by their very nature divide, estrange, alienate, make a man feel himself 
as someone apart, separate; such are hate, fear, jealousy, pride, envy. These are 
emotions of a material order, making one believe in matter. And there are emotions 
which unite, bring together, make a man feel a part of some large whole; such are love, 
sympathy, friendship, compassion, love of one's country, love of nature, love of 
mankind. These emotions lead a man out of the material world and show him the truth 
of the world of fantasy. Emotions of the second order are more easily freed from self­
elements than emotions of the first order. Although at the same time there can be quite 
an impersonal pride - pride in some heroic deed performed by another man. There may 
even be an impersonal envy, when we envy a man who has conquered himself, 
conquered his personal desire to live, sacrificed himself for something which 
everybody considers to be right and just and yet which other people cannot bring 
themselves to do; dare not even think about through weakness, through attachment to 
life. There may be an impersonal hatred -hatred of injustice, violence, anger against 
stupidity, against dullness; 
aversion to foulness, to hypocrisy. These feelings undoubtedly lift up and purify man's 
soul and help him to see things which he would not otherwise see. 
Christ driving the money-changers out of the temple or expressing 
* C. H. Hinton, A New Era of Thought, London, George Allen & Unwin, 1910, pp. 
77, 78.

[PAG 199]
his opinion of the Pharisees was not at all meek or mild. And there are cases 
where meekness and mildness are not a virtue at all. Emotions of love, 
sympathy, pity are very easily transformed into sentimentality, into 
weakness. And in this form they naturally serve only absence of knowledge, 
i.e. matter. The difficulty of dividing emotions into categories is increased by
the fact that all emotions of the higher order, without exception, can also be 
personal, and then their effect is no different from that of the other category. 
There exists a division of emotions into PURE and IMPURE. We all know this, 
we all use these words, but we understand very little what this means. Indeed, 
what does 'pure' or 'impure' mean in relation to feeling?
Ordinary morality divides emotions, a priori, into pure and impure
according to external traits, just as Noah divided animals in his ark. 
Moreover, all 'carnal desires' are relegated into the category of the IMPURE. In 
reality, however, 'carnal desires' are, of course, as pure as everything else in 
nature. Nevertheless there actually are pure and impure emotions. We are 
well aware that there is truth in this division. Where is it then? What does it 
mean? 
An examination of emotions from the point of view of knowledge can 
alone give a key to this problem. 
An impure emotion is exactly the same as a dirty glass, dirty water or an 
impure sound, i.e. an emotion which is not pure, which contains foreign 
matter or a sediment, or echoes of other emotions; 
IMPURE-MIXED. An impure emotion gives an obscured, not pure knowledge, 
just as a dirty glass gives a confused image. A pure emotion gives a clear, 
pure image of the knowledge which it is intended to transmit. 
This is the only possible solution of the problem. The main obstacle which 
prevents us from arriving at this solution is the usual moral tendency which 
has divided emotions a priori into 'moral' and 'immoral'. But if we try for a 
moment to discard the usual moral framework, we shall see that the matter is 
much more simple, that there are no emotions impure in their nature, and 
that every emotion may be either pure or impure according to whether it 
contains an admixture of other emotions or not. 
There may be pure sensuality, the sensuality of the 'Song of Songs', which 
passes into the sensation of cosmic life and enables one to hear the beating
pulse of Nature. And there may be impure sensuality, mixed with other 
emotions, good or bad from the moral point of view, but equally making 
sensuality turbid.

[PAG 200]
There may be pure sympathy — and there may be sympathy mixed with 
calculation to receive something for one's sympathy. There may be pure
desire to know, a thirst for knowledge for the sake of knowledge, and there 
may be a pursuit of knowledge led by considerations of profit and gain to be 
derived from this knowledge. 
In their external manifestations pure and impure emotions may differ very
little. Two men may play chess and be quite alike in their outward behaviour, 
but one may be driven by ambition, desire of victory, and he will be full of 
different unpleasant feelings towards his opponent - apprehension, envy of a 
clever move, vexation, jealousy, animosity, or anticipation of his winnings;
but another may simply try to solve the complicated mathematical problem 
before him, without giving a thought to his opponent. 
The emotion of the first will be impure if only because too much is mixed 
with it. The emotion of the second will be pure. The meaning of this is, of 
course, perfectly obvious. 
Examples of such a division of outwardly similar emotions may be 
constantly seen in artistic, literary, scientific, social and even in spiritual and 
religious activities of men. In all domains only complete victory over the 
self-element leads man to a right knowledge of the world and himself. All 
emotions coloured by the SELF-ELEMENT are like concave, convex or 
distorting glasses which refract the rays incorrectly and so distort the image
of the world. 
Thus the problem of emotional knowledge consists in a corresponding 
preparation of the emotions which serve as instruments of knowledge.
'Become as little children . . .' and 'Blessed are the pure in heart. . . .' These 
words of the Gospels speak, first of all, about the purification of emotions. It 
is impossible to know rightly through impure emotions. Therefore, in the 
interests of a right knowledge of the world and oneself, the work of 
purification and elevation of emotions should go on in man. 
This last brings us to a totally new view of morality. Morality, the aim of 
which consists precisely in establishing a system of right relationship to 
emotions and in assisting their purification and elevation, ceases to be in our 
eyes a tedious and self-contained exercise in virtue. Morality is a form of 
aesthetics. 
That which is not moral is first of all not aesthetic, because it is not co­
ordinated, not harmonious. 
We see all the enormous significance morality can have in our life; 
we see the significance morality has for knowledge because there are 
emotions through which we gain knowledge, and there are emotions

[PAG 201]
by which we are led astray. If morality can indeed help us to discriminate 
between them, then its value is incontestable precisely from the point of view 
of knowledge. 
The psychology of our ordinary conversational language knows very well 
that malice, hatred, anger BLIND a man, DIM his reason; it knows that fear 
DRIVES ONE INSANE, and so on and so on. 
But we also know that every emotion may serve knowledge and absence of 
knowledge.
Let us take an emotion, valuable and capable of a very high evolution, such 
as pleasure in activity. This emotion is a powerful moving force in culture, it 
serves the perfectioning of life and the development of all the higher 
capacities of man. But the same emotion is also the cause of an endless series 
of errors and faux pas which mankind commits and for which it has 
afterwards to pay bitterly. In the excitement of activity man easily tends to 
forget the aim for the sake of which he started to act; to take the very activity
for the aim; and for the sake of preserving the activity to sacrifice the aim. 
This can be seen especially clearly in the activity of various religious trends. 
Having started in one direction a man, without noticing it, turns in the 
opposite direction and very often heads towards the abyss thinking that he is 
scaling the heights. 
Nothing is more contradictory, more paradoxical than a man absorbed in 
activity. We are so used to 'man' that his extraordinary perversions do not 
strike us as strange. 
Violence in the name of freedom. Violence in the name of love. Preaching
Christianity sword in hand. The stakes of the Inquisition to the glory of a 
God of Mercy. The oppression of the freedom of thought and speech on the 
part of ministers of religion. All these are utter absurdities of which only men 
are capable. 
A right understanding of morality, not as it is but as it should be, could 
save us to a great extent from such perversions of thought. Altogether, there 
is very little morality in our life. European culture has followed the path of 
intellectual development. The intellect invented and organized without 
thinking of the moral meaning of its activity, and this led to the result that the 
crown of European culture is the 'Dreadnought'. 
Many people think in this way, and because of this take a negative attitude 
to all culture. But this also is unfair. Besides the 'Dreadnought', European
thought has produced much that is useful and valuable, much that makes life 
easier. The working out of principles of freedom and justice; the abolition of 
slavery (though nominal); in many spheres, victory over hostile nature; 
means of disseminating

[PAG 202]
thought, the press; the miracles of modern medicine and surgery - all these are 
undoubtedly real achievements and must be taken into consideration. But there is no 
morality in them, i.e. no truth but, on the contrary, a great many lies. We are satisfied 
with principles as principles, lulled by the thought that one day they will be applied to 
life, and we are in no way surprised or disturbed by the fact that, while we evolve 
beautiful principles, the whole of our life (i.e. the life of cultured humanity) goes in the 
opposite direction. A cultured European invents with equal ease a machine-gun and a 
new surgical apparatus. European culture started with the life of a savage, as though 
taking this life for a pattern and beginning to develop all its sides, without thinking of 
their moral value. The savage smashed the head of his enemy with a simple club. We 
have invented very complicated devices for the same purpose which are capable of 
smashing simultaneously hundreds and thousands of heads. Flying, about which men 
dreamed for thousands of years, has been achieved, and used first of all for the 
purposes of war. 
Morality should have been the co-ordination of all sides of life, i.e. of the actions of 
man and humanity with the higher emotions and the higher attainments of the intellect. 
From this point of view it becomes clear why it has been said earlier that morality is a 
form of aesthetics. Aesthetics - the sense of beauty, is the sense of the relationship of 
parts to the whole, the need for a certain harmonious relationship. And morality is the 
same. Actions, thoughts and feelings are not moral when they are uncoordinated, 
inharmonious with the higher understanding and higher sensations accessible to man. 
The introduction of morality into our life would make it less paradoxical, less 
contradictory, more logical and, above all, more civilized, because now our vaunted 
civilization is very much compromised by the 'Dreadnought', i.e. by wars and all that is 
connected with them, as well as by many things in 'peace-time', such as capital 
punishment, prisons and so on. 
Morality or moral aesthetics, in the sense in which it is taken here, is indispensable 
for us. Without it we forget too easily that the word has, after all, some relation to the 
deed. We are interested in a great many things, we probe into many things, but, for 
some reason, we completely fail to notice the lack of correspondence between our 
spiritual life and our life on earth. So we live in two lives: in one of them we are 
excessively strict with ourselves, we carefully analyse every idea before voicing an 
opinion about it; in the other, on the contrary, we very easily allow all kinds of 
compromises, very easily fail to see what we do not wish to see. And we are reconciled 
to this

[PAG 203]
division. It is as if we do not even find it necessary to carry out our high ideas in 
practice, as if we almost make a principle out of this division between the 'real' and the 
"spiritual'. The result is all the monstrosities of modern life - all the infinite falsification 
of our life -falsification of the press, of art, the theatre, science, politics; falsification 
which stifles us like some foul morass but which we ourselves create because we 
ourselves, and no one else, are servants and vassals of this falsification. We are not 
conscious of the necessity to carry out our ideas in practice, to introduce them into our 
everyday activity, and we admit the possibility of this activity being contrary to our 
spiritual aspirations. In other words, we admit the possibility of it following one of the 
stereotyped patterns, the harm of which we recognize but for which no one of us 
individually holds himself responsible, because he has not created them himself. We 
have no sense of personal responsibility, no courage, not even any consciousness of the 
need for them. All this would have been very sad, and hopelessly sad, if the concept 
'we' were in actual fact so indisputable. In reality, however, the correctness of the very 
term 'we' is subject to grave doubts. The enormous majority of the population of the 
earthly globe is actually engaged in destroying, distorting and falsifying the ideas of the 
minority. The majority has no ideas of its own. It is incapable of understanding the 
ideas of the minority and, left to itself, it is inevitably bound to distort and destroy. 
Imagine a zoo full of apes. A man is working in the zoo. The apes observe his 
movements and try to imitate him. But they can only imitate the external movements; 
the purpose and meaning of these movements are hidden from them. Therefore, their 
movements will have quite a different result. And if the apes manage to get out of the 
cage and get hold of the man's tools, they may destroy all the work of this man and do a 
lot of harm to themselves. But they will never be able to create anything. Con­
sequently, a man would make a great mistake if he spoke of their 'work' and referred to 
them as 'we'. Creation and destruction - or rather ability to create or ability only to 
destroy - are the two main signs of the two types or two races of man. 
Morality is necessary to 'man'. Only from the point of view of morality is it possible 
to distinguish unhesitatingly between the work of man and the activity of apes. At the 
same time, nowhere do delusions spring up more easily than in the domain of morality. 
Engrossed in his own morality and moral preachings a man forgets the aim of moral 
perfection, forgets that the aim consists in knowledge. He begins to see the aim in 
morality itself. Then there takes place an a priori division of emotions into good and 
bad, 'moral' and

[PAG 204]
'immoral'. At the same time, a correct understanding of the aim and significance of 
emotions is completely lost. A man is engrossed in his 'goodness'; he wants all the 
others to be as 'good' as himself or as the remote ideal he sets himself. The result is 
enjoyment of morality for the sake of morality, or a kind of moral sport - exercise of 
morality for morality's sake. This stops all thought. A man begins to be afraid of 
everything. Everywhere, in all manifestations of life he begins to see something 
'immoral', threatening to cast him or other people down from the height to which they 
have risen or may rise. He develops a highly suspicious attitude to other people's 
morals. In the heat of proselytizing, wishing to spread his moral views, he begins to 
regard with definite enmity all that is not in accord with his morality. All this becomes 
'black' in his eyes. Starting from complete freedom, he very easily convinces himself, 
by means of a few compromises, that it is necessary to fight against freedom. He 
already begins to admit a censorship of thought. A free expression of opinions opposed 
to his own seems to him inadmissible. All this may be done with the best intentions, 
but we all know very well what it leads to. 
No tyranny is more fierce than the tyranny of morality. Everything is sacrificed to it. 
And, naturally, nothing blinds one more than such a tyranny, such a 'morality'. 
And yet humanity needs morality, but of quite a different kind - a morality based on 
real data of higher knowledge. Humanity is passionately seeking it and perhaps will 
find it. Then, on the basis of this new morality a great division will take place, and the 
few who will be able to follow it will begin to rule the others, or will go away 
altogether. In any case, owing to the new morality and the forces it will bring in, 
contradictions of life will disappear and the biped animal, constituting the majority of 
mankind, will no longer be able to pose as man. 
The organized forms of intellectual knowledge are: science, based on observation, 
calculation and experience, and philosophy, based on the speculative method of 
reasoning and deduction. 
The organized forms of emotional knowledge are: religion and art. Religious 
teachings, taking on the character of 'cults' and thus departing from the original 
'revelation' upon which they were founded, are entirely based on the emotional nature 
of man. Majestic temples, the gorgeous vestments of priests and clergymen, the pomp 
of religious rituals, processions, sacrifices, singing, music, dances - the aim of all these 
things is to incite a certain emotional state, to evoke in man

[PAG 205]
certain definite feelings. Religious myths, legends, stories of the lives of gods
and saints, prophecies, apocalypses, when they lose their original purpose of 
serving knowledge, pursue the same aim - they all act on imagination, on 
feeling. 
The purpose of all this is to give man a God, to give him morality, that is, 
to make accessible to him a definite knowledge of the hidden side of the 
world. Religion may deviate from its true aim, it may serve earthly interests 
and aims. But its origin lies in the search for truth and for God. 
Art serves beauty, i.e. a particular kind of emotional knowledge. Art finds 
this beauty in everything and makes a man feel it and thus know. Art is a 
powerful instrument for the knowledge of the noumenal world: mysteries, 
one deeper and more amazing than the other, become revealed to man's 
vision if he holds the magic key. But the mere thought that this mystery is not 
for knowledge but for enjoyment destroys all the enchantment. As soon as art 
begins to enjoy the beauty already found, instead of seeking new beauty, all 
progress is checked, and art becomes transformed into a useless aestheticism 
surrounding man with a wall and preventing him from seeing further. The 
search for beauty is the aim of art, just as the search for God and truth is the 
aim of religion. Like art, religion no longer progresses when it ceases to seek 
God and truth and begins to think that it has found them. This idea is 
expressed in the Gospels: 'Seek . . . the kingdom of God and his 
righteousness. . . .'It does not say you will find, but only, seek. 
Science, philosophy, religion and art are forms of knowledge. The method of 
science is observation, calculation, experience; the method of philosophy is 
speculation; the method of religion and art is moral or aesthetic emotional 
suggestion. But science, philosophy, religion and art really begin to serve 
true knowledge only when they begin to manifest intuition, i.e. the sensing
and finding of some inner qualities in things. Actually one may say - and 
perhaps it will be most correct - that the aim of even purely intellectual 
scientific and philosophical systems is not at all to give men certain 
information, but to raise man to a height of thought and feeling where he 
himself can pass to the new and higher forms of knowledge, to which art and 
religion are closest. 
Moreover, it should be borne in mind that the very division of science, 
philosophy, religion and art shows their incompleteness. A complete religion 
embraces religion, art, philosophy and science; a

[PAG 206]
complete art embraces art, philosophy, science and religion; complete science, 
complete philosophy will embrace religion and art. A religion contradicting science 
and a science contradicting religion are equally false.

[PAG 207]
CHAPTER 19  
The intellectual method. Objective knowledge. The limits of objective knowledge. 
Possibility of expanding knowledge by the application of the psychological method. 
New forms of knowledge. The ideas of Plotinus. Different forms of consciousness. 
Sleep (potential slate of consciousness). Dreams (consciousness enclosed within 
itself, reflected from itself). Waking consciousness (dualistic sensation of the world). 
Ecstasy ('going out of oneself'). 'Turiya' (the absolute consciousness of all as of 
oneself). 'The drop absorbing the ocean.' 'Nirvana.' 
Having established the principle of the possible unification of the forms of 
our knowledge, we must now see if this unification has been realized 
anywhere; how it may be realized; and whether it will be realized in an 
entirely new form or whether one of the existing forms will embrace all the 
others. 
For this we shall have to return to the fundamental principles of our 
knowledge and compare the possible chances of development possessed by
different ways. In other words, we must attempt to find out which way and 
which method leads one quickest of all to new knowledge. 
To a certain extent we have already established this concerning the 
emotional way: the growth of emotions, their purification and liberation from 
the self-elements must lead to new knowledge. 
But how can the intellectual way come to new forms of knowledge? 
First of all, what is the new knowledge? 
New knowledge is direct perception by inner feeling. I feel my own pain 
directly; new knowledge may enable me to feel as my own the pain of 
another man. Thus new knowledge is in itself an expansion of direct 
experience. The question is, can the expansion of objective knowledge be
based on this new experience? We must examine the nature of objective 
knowledge.
Our objective knowledge consists of science and philosophy. Inner 
experience science has always regarded as data, as something which cannot 
be changed, but which is 'doubtful' and needs to be verified and corroborated 
by the objective method. Science studies the world as an objective 
phenomenon, and strives to study man's inner life with all its properties also 
as an objective phenomenon.

[PAG 208]
From another angle, simultaneously with this, there has continued the study of man's 
inner life, as it were, from within, but to this study no great significance was ever 
attached. The limits of inner knowledge, i.e. the frontiers of inner life, were regarded as 
strictly defined, established and unchangeable. The possibility of expansion, though 
based on the same inner experience, was admitted only in the case of objective 
knowledge. 
We must see what constitutes the possibility of the expansion of objective 
knowledge. Is there no mistake here? Is the expansion of objective knowledge founded 
on a limited experience really possible, and are the possibilities of experience really 
limited? 
In developing, science, i.e. objective knowledge, met with obstacles at every turn. 
Science studies phenomena; as soon as it tries to pass on to the study of causes, it is 
confronted by the wall of the unknown and, for it, the unknowable. The question is: is 
this unknowable absolutely unknowable or is it unknowable only for the methods of 
our science? 
At present this is the situation: the number of unknown facts in every domain of 
scientific knowledge is increasing rapidly; and the unknown threatens to swallow up 
the known or what is accepted as known. The progress of science, especially in recent 
times, may be denned as a very rapid growth of the regions of ignorance. Of course in 
the past there was no less ignorance than there is now. But in the past it was not so 
forcibly felt - then science did not know what it is ignorant of. Now it knows this more 
and more, it realizes more and more clearly its own conditional nature. A little further, 
and in every separate branch of science that which it does not know will outgrow that 
which it does know. 
In every department science itself begins to repudiate its first principles. A little 
further, and science as a whole will ask itself: 
Where am I? 
Positivist thinking, which set itself the task of drawing general conclusions from the 
knowledge gained by each separate department of science and by all of them together, 
will find itself obliged to draw a conclusion from that which the sciences do not know. 
And then the whole world will be confronted with a colossus with feet of clay, or rather 
without any feet at all, with a huge nebulous body suspended in mid-air. 
Philosophy has seen for a long time that this colossus has no feet, but the greater pan 
of cultured humanity is still under the hypnosis of positivism, which sees something in 
the place of those feet. Soon,

[PAG 209]
however, this illusion will have to be abandoned. Mathematics, which lies at the 
foundation of positive knowledge, and to which exact knowledge always refers with 
pride as to its subject and vassal, actually denies positivism as a whole. Mathematics 
was included in the cycle of positivist sciences only through misunderstanding, and 
soon the chief weapon AGAINST POSITIVISM will be precisely -mathematics. 
I call here positivism that system which asserts, in opposition to Kant, that the study 
of phenomena can bring us nearer to things in themselves, i.e. which affirms that 
through studying phenomena we can come to the understanding of causes. Moreover, 
and most important as an indication, positivism looks for causes of biological and 
psychological phenomena in physico-mechanical phenomena. 
The usual positivist view denies the existence of the hidden side of life, i.e. it finds 
that this hidden side consists of electro-magnetic phenomena and is becoming 
gradually revealed to us, and that the progress of science consists in a gradual 
unveiling of the hidden. 
'This is not known as yet,' says a positivist when he is shown something 'hidden', 
'but it will be known. Science, proceeding on the same lines it has been following so 
far, will discover that too. After all, five hundred years ago people in Europe knew 
nothing about the existence of America; seventy years ago no one knew of the 
existence of bacteria; twenty-five years ago they knew nothing about radium. But 
America, bacteria and radium are all discovered now. In the same way, and by the 
same means, and only by these means, will be discovered everything that generally is 
to be discovered. Apparatus is being perfected, the methods, means and observations 
are becoming more delicate. Things which could not be even suspected a hundred 
years ago have now become generally known and generally understood facts. If 
anything can be known at all, it will become known precisely by this method.' 
Thus speak adherents of the positivist view of the world, but their reasonings are 
based on the deepest illusion. 
This assertion of positivism would be quite correct if science moved uniformly in all 
the directions of the unknown; if there were no sealed doors for it; if a multitude of 
questions, fundamental questions, did not remain just as obscure as in the times when 
no science existed at all. We see that whole vast regions are closed to science, that it 
has never penetrated them and, what is worse, has made no step in the direction of 
these regions.

[PAG 210]
There are a great many questions towards the understanding of which 
science has made no movement at all, many questions among which a 
modern scientist, armed with all his knowledge, is as helpless as a savage or
as a four-year-old child. 
Such are the questions of life and death, the problems of time and space, 
the mystery of consciousness, and so on, and so on. 
We all know this, and all we can do is - try not to think about the existence 
of these questions, to forget about them. And this is what we usually do. Still, 
this does not do away with the questions. They continue to exist, and at any 
moment we may turn to them and test by means of them the steadiness and 
strength of our scientific method. And every time, at such an attempt, we see 
that our scientific method is of no value for these questions. By means of it 
we can establish the chemical composition of distant stars; photograph the 
human skeleton invisible to the eye, invent floating mines which can be 
controlled at a distance by electric waves and destroy at once hundreds and 
thousands of lives. But by this method we cannot say what a man sitting next 
to us is thinking about. No matter how much we weigh, photograph or sound 
the man, we shall never find out his thoughts, until he himself 
tells US. BUT THIS IS A DIFFERENT METHOD ALTOGETHER. 
The sphere of action of the methods of exact science is strictly limited. This 
sphere is - the world of direct experience accessible to man. Exact science 
with its method has never penetrated and will never penetrate the world 
which lies beyond the boundaries of the ordinary organic experience. 
Expansion of objective knowledge is possible only with an expansion of 
direct experience. But in spite of all the growth of objective sciences, science 
has not made a single step in this direction, and the boundary line of 
experience remains in exactly the same place. 
If science had made a single step in this direction, if we could feel or sense 
at least something differently, then we should be able to admit that science is 
progressing and might take two, three, ten or a thousand steps forward. But 
since it has not taken one single step, we are justified in thinking that it will 
never take one. The world beyond the experience of the five senses is closed 
to objective investigation, and for this there are quite definite reasons. 
By no means everything that exists can be detected by one of the five 
senses. 
In the ordinary understanding, objective existence is a definite form of 
existence in a very narrow sense, which is very far from exhausting the whole 
of existence. The mistake of positivism con-

[PAG 211]
sists in the fact that it has recognized as really existing only that which exists 
objectively (as it understands it) and has begun to deny even the existence of all the 
rest. 
What then is objectivity? 
We may define it in this way: owing to the properties of our perception or owing to 
the conditions under which our mind works, we segregate a small number of facts into 
a definite group. This group of facts represents the objective world and is accessible to 
scientific study. But this group does not by any means represent EVERYTHING 
EXISTING. 
Extension in space and extension in time is the first condition of objective existence. 
But the forms of the extension of a thing in space and its existence in time are created 
by the subject perceiving the thing, and do not belong to the thing itself. Matter is first 
of all three-dimensional. Three-dimensionality is the form of our perception. Matter of 
four dimensions would mean a change in the form of our perception. 
Materiality means the conditions of existence in time and space, i.e. conditions of 
existence under which 'two identical phenomena cannot take place at the same time and 
in the same place'. This is an exhaustive definition of materiality. It is clear that in the 
conditions known to us, two identical phenomena taking place at the same time and in 
the same place would constitute one phenomenon. But this is obligatory only for the 
conditions of existence we know, i.e. for such matter as we perceive. For the universe 
this is not at all obligatory. We constantly observe in practice conditions of materiality 
in those cases in which we have to create a sequence of phenomena in our life or are 
forced to make a selection, for our matter does not allow of more than a certain definite 
number of phenomena to be contained in a definite interval of time. The need for 
selection is perhaps the chief visible sign of materiality. Outside of matter the necessity 
of selection disappears, and if we can imagine a being, capable of feeling, living 
outside the conditions of materiality, such a being will be able to possess 
simultaneously things which, from our point of view, are incompatible, conflicting and 
mutually exclusive; he will be able to be in several places at once; to assume different 
aspects; to perform at the same time contradictory and mutually exclusive actions. 
In speaking of matter it is necessary always to remember that matter is not a 
substance but merely a condition. For example, a man is blind. It is impossible to 
regard blindness as a substance. It is a condition of the existence of the given man. 
Matter is a kind of blindness.

[PAG 212]
Objective knowledge can grow indefinitely with the perfection of apparatuses and 
methods of observation and investigation. The only thing it cannot step over is - the 
limits of the three-dimensional sphere, i.e. the conditions of space and time, because it 
is created in those conditions, and the conditions of existence of the three-dimensional 
world constitute its own conditions of existence. Objectively, knowledge will be always 
subject to these conditions, because otherwise it would cease to exist. No apparatus, no 
machine will ever overcome these conditions, for if they do overcome them, by this 
very fact they will, first of all, eliminate themselves. Only perpetuum mobile, i.e. a 
violation of the fundamental laws of the three-dimensional world as we know it, would 
represent a victory over the three-dimensional world in the three-dimensional world 
itself. 
However, it is necessary to remember that objective knowledge does not study facts, 
but only representations of facts. 
IN ORDER THAT OBJECTIVE KNOWLEDGE SHOULD TRANSCEND THE LIMITS OF THE THREE-
DIMENSIONAL SPHERE, IT IS NECESSARY THAT THE CONDITIONS OF REPRESENTATION SHOULD 
CHANGE. 
So long as this does not take place, our objective knowledge is confined within the 
limits of an infinite three-dimensional sphere. It can advance ad infinitum along the 
radii of that sphere, but it will not pass over into the domain of which our three­
dimensional world represents a section. And we know from what has gone before that 
if our perception were still more limited, objective knowledge would be 
correspondingly limited. It is impossible to convey to a dog the idea that the earth is 
round; to make it remember the weight of the sun and the distances between the 
planets. Its objective knowledge is much more personal than ours. And the cause of this 
lies in its limited mind. 
Thus we see that objective knowledge depends on the properties of the mind. 
Of course, there is a tremendous difference between the objective knowledge of a 
savage and that of Herbert Spencer. But neither the one nor the other oversteps the 
limits of the three-dimensional sphere, i.e. the domain of the 'conditional', the unreal. In 
order to get out of the three-dimensional sphere, it is necessary to expand or change the 
forms of perception. 
Is it possible to expand perception? 
The study of complex forms of cognition tells us that it is possible. 
The famous Alexandrian philosopher of the third century, Plotinus, affirmed that for 
perfect cognition the subject and the object should be

[PAG 213]
united - that the rational agent and the thing which is being perceived should not be 
separated. 'For that which sees is itself and the thing which is seen.'* 
Naturally one should understand here 'seeing' not in a literal sense. 'Seeing' changes 
with the change of the state of consciousness in which it occurs. 
What forms of consciousness are there? 
Indian philosophy distinguishes four states of consciousness: 
sleep, dreams, waking state and the state of absolute consciousness — 'Turiya'** (The 
Ancient Wisdom, Annie Besant). 
G. R. S. Mead, in the preface to Taylor's translation of Plotinus, connects the 
terminology of Shankaracharya, master of the Advaita-Vedântin school of ancient 
India, with the terminology of Plotinus: 
The first or spiritual state was ecstasy, from ecstasy it forgot itself into deep sleep; 
from profound sleep it awoke out of unconsciousness, but still within itself, into the 
internal world of dreams, from dreaming it passed finally into the thoroughly waking 
state, and the outer world of sense 
Ecstasy is a term used by Plotinus. It is completely identical with the term Turiya of 
Indian psychology. 
In the so-called waking state consciousness is surrounded by things constructed by 
the organs of sense and the perceiving apparatus in the phenomenal world; it 
distinguishes the 'subjective' from the 'objective' and differentiates its own images of 
representation from the 'reality'. It accepts the phenomenal objective world as reality 
and dreams as unreality. At the same time it seems to regard as unreal the whole 
subjective world. Its dim sensation of the real things lying beyond that which is 
constructed by the organs of sense, i.e. sensations of noumena, consciousness identifies 
with dreams, i.e. with the unreal, the imaginary, the abstract, the subjective, and 
regards only phenomena as real. 
Gradually, convinced by reason of the unreality of phenomena, or sensing inwardly 
this unreality and the reality of that which lies beyond them, we free ourselves from the 
mirage of phenomena and begin to understand that the whole phenomenal world is 
actually also 
* 'On Gnostic Hypostases', The Select Works of Plotinus, T Taylor, ed G R S 
Mead, London, G Bell & Sons, 1929 
** According to the interpretation of the Southern Indian school of occultism the 
four states of consciousness are understood in a somewhat different order The one 
furthest from truth, the most illusory, is the waking state (taken in its ordinary sense), 
the second, sleep, is already nearer to truth, the third, deep sleep without dreams is 
contact with the truth, and the fourth, Samadhi, or ecstasy, is merging with the truth

[PAG 214]
subjective and that true reality lies much deeper. Then a complete revolution of all 
ideas of reality takes place in consciousness. What was considered real before,  
becomes unreal, and what was regarded as unreal becomes real.* Transition into the 
absolute state of consciousness is 'UNION WITH 
DIVINITY', 'SEEING GOD', 'SENSING THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN', 'TRANS- 
LATION INTO NIRVANA'. All these expressions of mystical religions express the 
psychological fact of an expansion of consciousness, an expansion when consciousness  
absorbs all into itself. 
C. W. Leadbeater, in an essay 'Some Notes on Higher Planes. Nirvana' (The 
Theosophist, July 1910), writes: 
Sir Edwin Arnold wrote of that beatific condition that 'The dew-drop slips into the 
shining sea'. Those who have passed through that most marvellous of experiences 
know that, paradoxical as it may seem, the sensation is exactly the reverse, and that a 
far closer description would be that the ocean had somehow been poured into the 
drop! That consciousness, wide as the sea, with 'its centre everywhere and its 
circumference nowhere' is a great and glorious fact; but when a man attains it, it 
seems to him that his consciousness has widened to lake in all. 
This absorption of the ocean by a drop occurs because consciousness never 
disappears, i.e. it never vanishes, never becomes extinguished. When consciousness 
seems to disappear, in reality it only changes its form, ceases to be analogous to ours ­
and so we lose the means of ascertaining its existence. 
We have no exact data for thinking that it vanishes. To escape the field of our 
possible observation it is sufficient for it to change just a little. 
In the objective world a merging of the drop with the ocean naturally leads to the 
annihilation of the drop, to its absorption by the ocean. We have never observed any 
other order of things in the objective world, and so we never picture it to ourselves. But 
in the real, i.e. the subjective world, another order must necessarily exist and operate. 
A drop of consciousness merging with the ocean of consciousness, perceives the ocean 
but does not, through this, cease to be. Therefore the ocean undoubtedly becomes 
absorbed by the drop. 
In the 'Letters to Flaccus' of Plotinus we find a striking outline of 
conceptions of the subjective and the objective are bound to change. The usual 
designation will be incorrect for exact understanding. On the contrary, everything 
phenomenal will be subjective, and the truly objective will be that which, in ordinary 
conditions, is considered subjective or devoid of any existence.