=== Tertium Organum (P. D. Ouspensky).pdf — CHUNK 13/18 ===
Chars: 44,127 | Offset: 532,111



[PAG 215]
psychology and a theory of knowledge, based precisely on the idea of expansion of 
perception. 
External objects present us only with appearances. Concerning them, therefore, we 
may be said to possess opinion rather than knowledge. The distinctions in the actual 
world of appearance are of import only to ordinary and practical men. Our question 
lies with the ideal reality that exists behind appearance. How does the mind perceive 
these ideas? Are they without us, and is the reason, like sensation, occupied with 
objects external to itself? What certainty would we then have - what assurance that 
our perception was infallible? The object perceived would be a something different 
from the mind perceiving it. We should have then an image instead of reality. It 
would be monstrous to believe for a moment that the mind was unable to perceive 
ideal truth exactly as it is, and that we had not certainty and real knowledge 
concerning the world of intelligence. It follows, therefore, that this region of truth is 
not to be investigated as a thing external to us, and so only imperfectly known. It is 
within us. Here the objects we contemplate and that which contemplates are identical 
-both are thought. The subject cannot surely know an object different from itself. The 
world of ideas lies within our intelligence. Truth, therefore, is not; the agreement of 
our apprehension of an external object with the object itself. It is the agreement of the 
mind with itself. Consciousness, therefore, is the sole basis of certainty. The mind is 
its own witness. Reason sees in itself that which is above itself as its source; and 
again, that which is below itself as still itself once more. 
Knowledge has three degrees - opinion, science, illumination. The means or 
instrument of the first is sense; of the second dialectic; of the third intuition. To the 
last I subordinate reason. It is absolute knowledge founded on the identity of the 
mind knowing with the object known. There is a raying out of all orders of 
existence, an external emanation from the ineffable One. There is again a returning 
impulse, drawing all upwards and inwards towards the centre from whence all came. 
. . . The wise man recognizes the idea of the good within him. This he develops by 
withdrawals into the holy place of his own soul. He who does not understand how 
the soul contains the beautiful within itself, seeks to realize beauty by laborious 
production. His aim should rather be to concentrate and simplify, and so to expand 
his being; instead of going out into the manifold, to forsake it for the One, and so to 
float upwards towards the divine fount whose stream flows within him. 
You ask, how can we know the Infinite? I answer, not by reason. It is the office of 
reason to distinguish and define. The Infinite, therefore, cannot be ranked among its 
objects. You can only apprehend the Infinite by a faculty superior to reason, by 
entering into a state in which you are your finite self no longer - in which the divine 
essence is communicated to you. This is ecstasy. It is the liberation of your mind 
from its finite consciousness. Like can only apprehend like; when you thus cease to 
be finite, you become one with the Infinite. In the reduction of your soul to its 
simplest self, its divine essence, you realize this union - this identity. 
But this sublime condition is not of permanent duration. It is only now and then 
that we can enjoy this elevation above the limits of the body and

[PAG 216]
the world. I myself have realized it but three times as yet, and Porphyry hitherto not 
once. 
All that tends to purify and elevate the mind will assist you in this attainment, and 
facilitate the approach and the recurrence of these happy intervals. There are, then, 
different roads by which this end may be reached. The love of beauty which exalts 
the poet; that devotion to the One and that ascent of science which makes the 
ambition of the philosopher, and that love and those prayers by which some devout 
and ardent soul tends in its moral purity towards perfection. These are the great 
highways conducting to that height above the actual and the particular, where we 
stand in the immediate presence of the Infinite, who shines out as from the deeps of 
the soul.* 
In another place in his writings Plotinus gives a still more exact definition of ecstatic 
knowledge, pointing to such properties of it which show us quite clearly that an infinite 
expansion of subjective knowledge is implied. 
In the vision of God [says Plotinus] what sees is not our reason, but something prior 
and superior to our reason. ... He who thus sees does not properly see, does not 
distinguish or imagine two things (the seer and the seen). He changes, he ceases to be 
himself, preserves nothing of himself. Absorbed in God, he makes but one with him, 
like a centre of a circle coinciding with another centre!** 
*'Plotinus to Flaccus', as quoted by Dr R. M. Bucke in Cosmic Consciousness, 
Philadelphia, Innes & Sons, 1905. 
** W. James, The Varieties of Religious Experience, New York, Longmans 
Green, 1917.

[PAG 217]
CHAPTER 20  
The sensation of infinity. The first test of a Neophyte. Intolerable sadness. Loss of 
everything real. What would an animal experience on becoming a man? Transition to 
a new logic. Our logic as based on the observation of laws of the phenomenal world. 
Its unsuitability for the study of the noumenal world. The need of a new logic. 
Analogous axioms in logic and mathematics. TWO MATHEMATICS. The mathematics 
of real magnitudes (infinite and variable); and mathematics of unreal imaginary 
magnitudes (finite and constant). Transfinite numbers -numbers lying BEYOND 
INFINITY. The possibility of different infinities. 
There exists an idea which a man should always try to remember when he finds himself 
too engrossed in the sense of the reality of the unreal visible world in which everything 
has a beginning and an end. It is the idea of infinity, the fact of infinity. 
In his book A New Era of Thought, in the chapter 'Space the Scientific Basis of 
Altruism and Religion', Hinton says: 
When we come upon infinity in any mode of our thought, it is a sign that that mode of 
thought is dealing with a higher reality than it is adapted for, and in struggling to 
represent it, can only do so by an infinite number of terms [realities of a higher order], 
And, indeed, what is infinity as an ordinary man pictures it? 
It is the only reality, and at the same time it is the abyss, the bottomless pit into 
which our mind falls after having risen to a height where it cannot keep a foothold. 
Now, let us imagine for a moment that a man begins to sense infinity in everything, 
every thought, every idea leads him to the sensation of infinity. 
This is bound to happen to a man who passes to the understanding of a higher order 
of reality. 
What will he feel then? 
He is bound to feel an abyss and a bottomless pit wherever he looks. And this feeling 
is bound to bring with it a sense of incredible fear, terror and sadness, until this terror 
and sadness become transformed into the joy of feeling new reality. 'An intolerable 
sadness is the very first experience of the Neophyte in occultism,' says the author of 
Light on the Path.

[PAG 218]
We have previously examined the way in which a two-dimensional being 
might come to the understanding of the third dimension. But we have not 
asked ourselves what such a being would feel when it begins to sense the 
third dimension, begins to be conscious of the 'new world' around itself. 
The first feeling is bound to be surprise and fear - a fear approaching terror,
for before it finds the new world it must lose the old. 
Let us imagine an animal in which flashes of human understanding begin to 
appear. 
What will be its first sensation? The first sensation will be that its old 
world, the world of the animal, a comfortable habitual world, the world into 
which it was born, to which it has grown accustomed, the only world it 
represents to itself as real, is crumbling away and falling into ruins all around. 
Everything that before appeared real becomes false, deceptive, fantastic, 
unreal. The sensation of the unreality of everything around must be very 
strong. 
Until such a being learns to perceive realities of another, a higher order, 
until it realizes that beyond the crumbling old world there opens up a new 
world, infinitely more beautiful - a long time must pass. Meanwhile the being
in whom new consciousness is being born must pass from one gulf of despair 
to another, from one negation to another. It must repudiate everything around 
it. And only then, having repudiated everything, will the possibility of 
passing into a new life be his. 
With the gradual loss of the old world the logic of the two-dimensional 
being, or what in its case took the place of logic, will suffer constant 
violation, and its strongest sensation will be that there is no logic, no laws of 
any kind. 
Formerly, when it was an animal, it reasoned thus: 
This is this
 This house is mine 
That is that
 That house is strange 
This is not that The strange house is not mine. 
Thus a strange house and its own house an animal regards as different 
objects having nothing in common. And now it will suddenly understand that 
both the strange house and its own house are equally - houses. 
How will it express this in its language of representations? In all probability it 
will be unable to express it at all, because it is impossible to express concepts 
in the language of an animal. The animal will simply confuse the sensations 
of the strange house and its

[PAG 219]
own house. It will begin to sense dimly some new properties in houses, and at the same 
time the properties which had made the strange house strange it will begin to sense less 
clearly. Simultaneously it will begin to sense new properties it did not know before. As 
a result it will necessarily feel in need of some system for the generalization of these 
new properties - the need of a new logic expressing the relations of the new order of 
things. But having no concepts, it will be unable to construe the axioms of Aristotelean 
logic and will express its sense of the new order in the form of a perfectly absurd 
proposition which, nevertheless, is much nearer truth. 
This is that. 
Or else let us imagine that to an animal in whom rudiments of logic find expression 
in the sensations 
This is this That is that This 
is not that 
somebody tries to prove that two different objects, two houses - its own and a strange 
one - are the same, that they represent the same thing, that both are - houses. The 
animal will never credit their sameness. For it the two houses - its own where it is fed, 
and the strange one where it is beaten if it comes in, will remain totally different. For it 
they will have nothing in common. No attempt to prove that these houses are the same 
thing will lead to anything until the animal senses this itself. Then, sensing dimly the 
idea of the sameness of two different objects and having no concepts, the animal will 
express this as something illogical from its point of view. An articulate two­
dimensional being will translate the idea - this and that are the same object, into the 
language of its own logic in the form of the formula: This is that. Of course, it will say 
that it is nonsense, that the sense of a new order of things leads to logical absurdities. 
But it will be unable to express its sensations in any different way. 
We are exactly in the same position when we, the dead, awaken i.e. when we, men, 
arrive at the sensation of a different life, the understanding of higher entities. 
The same fear, the same loss of the real, the same sensation of an all-round 
illogicality, the same formula: This is that. 
To realize the new world we must understand the new logicality. 
Our ordinary logic helps us to gauge only the relations existing in the

[PAG 220]
phenomenal world. A great many attempts have been made to define what logic is. But 
in its essence logic is just as undefinable as mathematics. 
What is mathematics? The science of magnitudes. 
What is logic? The science of concepts. 
But these are not definitions, they are merely a translation of the name. Mathematics, 
or the science of magnitudes, is a system studying quantitative relations between 
things; logic or the science of concepts is a system studying qualitative (categorical) 
relations between things. 
Logic is constructed on exactly the same plan as mathematics. Both logic and 
mathematics (at least the mathematics of 'finite' and 'constant' numbers) are deduced by 
us from observing the phenomena of our world. By means of generalizing our 
observations we gradually found relations which we called the fundamental laws of the 
world. 
In logic these fundamental laws are contained in the axioms of Aristotle and Bacon. 
A is A (That which was A will be A) 
A is not not A (That which was not A will be not A) 
Each thing is either A or not A (Each thing must be A or not A) 
The logic of Aristotle and Bacon, elaborated and supplemented by their numerous 
followers, operates solely with concepts. 
Logos, the word, is the subject of logic. To become the subject of logical reasoning, 
to be governed by the laws of logic an idea must be expressed in a word. What cannot 
be expressed in a word cannot enter into a logical system. Moreover, the word can enter 
a logical system, be subject to logical laws only as a concept. 
At the same time we know perfectly well that not everything can be expressed in 
words. In our life and in our feelings there is a great deal that cannot be fitted into 
concepts. So it is clear that even at this moment, at the present stage of our 
development, by no means everything can be logical for us. A great many things are 
essentially outside logic. Such is the entire domain of feelings, emotions, religion. All 
art is a complete illogicality. And we shall see presently that mathematics, the most 
exact of all sciences, is also completely illogical.* 
If we compare the logical axioms of Aristotle and Bacon with the axioms of the 
generally known mathematics, we shall see that they are entirely identical. 
The axioms of logic * Strictly speaking, the science parallel to logic is not 
mathematics, but geometry.

[PAG 221]
A is A 
A is not not A 
Each thing is either A or not A 
completely correspond to the fundamental axioms of mathematics, axioms of identity 
and difference. 
Every magnitude is equal to itself. The part is 
less than the whole. 
Two magnitudes, equal separately to a third, are equal to each other, etc. 
This similarity between the axioms of mathematics and logic goes very deep, and 
this allows us to draw the conclusion that they have the same origin. 
The laws of mathematics and the laws of logic are the laws of the reflection of the 
phenomenal world in our perception and thinking. 
Just as logical axioms can operate only with concepts and refer only to concepts, so 
mathematical axioms can operate only with finite and constant magnitudes and refer 
only to them. 
In relation to infinite and variable magnitudes these axioms are incorrect, just as 
logical axioms are incorrect even in relation to emotions, to symbols, to music and to 
the hidden meaning of the word, to say nothing of that content of ideas which cannot 
be put into words. 
What does it mean? 
It means that axioms of logic and mathematics are deduced by us from the 
observation of phenomena, i.e. the phenomenal world, and represent a certain 
conditional incorrectness, necessary for the cognition of the unreal, 'subjective' world ­
in the true meaning of the word. 
It has been pointed out earlier that in fact we have two mathematics. One — the 
mathematics of finite and constant numbers, represents an entirely artificial 
construction for solving problems on the basis of conditional data. The chief of these 
conditional data consists in the fact that in problems of this mathematics there is 
always taken only the 't' of the universe, i.e. only one section of the universe which is 
never mixed with another section. Thus the mathematics of finite and constant 
magnitudes studies an artificial universe and is itself something specially created on 
the basis of our observations of phenomena and as a means of facilitating these 
observations. The mathematics of finite and constant numbers is unable to go beyond 
phenomena. It

[PAG 222]
deals with an imaginary world, with imaginary magnitudes. (The practical results of 
those applied sciences which are based on mathematical sciences need not disturb the 
observer, because they are merely the solutions of problems in definite artificial 
conditions.) 
The other, the mathematics of infinite and variable magnitude is something entirely 
real, constructed on the basis of mental deductions about the real world. 
The first refers to the world of phenomena, which is nothing else than our incorrect 
perception and representation of the world. 
The second refers to the world of noumena, which is the world as it is. 
The first is unreal and exists only in our consciousness, in our imagination. 
The second is real and expresses the relations of the real world. 
An example of 'real mathematics', violating the fundamental axioms of our 
mathematics (and logic) is the so-called mathematics of transfinite numbers. 
Transfinite numbers, as their name implies, are numbers beyond infinity. 
Infinity, as represented by the sign ∞ is a mathematical expression with which, as 
such, it is possible to carry out all operations: divide, multiply, raise to powers. It is 
possible to raise infinity to the power of infinity - the result will be ∞∞ . This magnitude 
is an infinite number of times greater than a simple infinity. And at the same time they 
are equal ∞ = ∞∞. Precisely this is the most remarkable thing in transfinite numbers. 
You can carry out with them any operation you like, and they will change 
correspondingly, remaining at the same time equal. This violates the fundamental laws 
of mathematics, accepted for finite numbers. Having changed, a finite number can no 
longer be equal to itself. And yet we see here that, in changing, a transfinite number 
remains equal to itself. 
Moreover, transfinite numbers are entirely real. We can find examples in the real 
world corresponding to expressions ∞ and even ∞∞ and ∞∞ . 
Let us take a line, any segment of a line. We know that the number of points in this 
line is equal to infinity, because a point has no dimensions. If our segment equals an 
inch, and side by side with it we imagine a segment which equals a mile, then each 
point in the small segment will have a corresponding point in the large segment. The 
number of points in the segment an inch long is infinite. The number of points in a mile 
is also infinite. The result is ∞ = ∞.

[PAG 223]
Now let us imagine a square of which the given line a constitutes one side. 
The number of lines in a square is infinite. The number of points in every line 
is infinite. Consequently the number of points in a square equals infinity 
multiplied by itself an infinite number of times ∞∞. This magnitude is 
undoubtedly infinitely greater than the first ∞. And at the same time they are 
equal, as all infinite magnitudes are equal, because if there is infinity, it is one 
and it cannot change.
On the square a2 which we have obtained, let us construct a cube. This 
cube consists of an infinite number of squares, just as the square consists of 
an infinite number of lines, and the line - of an infinite number of points. 
Consequently the number of points in the cube a3 equals ∞∞. This expression 
is equal to the expressions ∞∞ and ∞, which means that infinity continues to 
grow, remaining at the same time unchanged. 
Thus we see in transfinite numbers that two magnitudes, each of which 
separately equals a third, may be not equal to each other. Altogether we see
that the fundamental axioms of our mathematics do not operate there, are not 
applicable there. And we have every right to establish the law that the 
fundamental axioms of mathematics, cited above, are not applicable there but 
are valid and applicable only for finite numbers. 
Moreover, we can say that the fundamental axioms of our mathematics are 
valid only for constant magnitudes. In other words, they require unity of time 
and place, namely, each magnitude is equal to itself at a given moment. But 
if we take a variable magnitude, and take it at different moments, it will not 
be equal to itself. Of course one may say that, in changing, it becomes 
another magnitude, that it is a given magnitude only so long as it does not 
change. But this is exactly what I mean. 
Axioms of our mathematics are applicable only to finite and constant 
magnitudes. 
So, in direct opposition to the usual view, we have to admit that 
mathematics of finite and constant magnitudes is unreal, i.e. it deals with 
unreal relations of unreal magnitudes, whereas the mathematics of infinite 
and fluent magnitudes is real, i.e. it deals with the real relations of real 
magnitudes. 
Indeed, the greatest magnitude of the first mathematics has no dimension 
whatever, is equal to nought or to a point in comparison with any magnitude 
of the second mathematics ALL THE MAGNITUDES 
OF WHICH, IN ALL THEIR VARIETY, ARE EQUAL AMONG THEMSELVES.

[PAG 224]
Thus here, as well as in logic, the axioms of the new mathematics appear as 
absurdities. 
A magnitude can be not equal to itself. 
The part can be equal to the whole or can be greater. 
One of two equal magnitudes can be infinitely greater than 
the other. All DIFFERENT magnitudes are equal to each other. 
We observe a complete analogy between the axioms of mathematics and those of 
logic. The logical unit - the concept - possesses all the properties of a finite and 
constant magnitude. The fundamental axioms of mathematics and logic are essentially 
the same. And they are correct in similar conditions and cease to be correct in similar 
conditions. 
We may say without the slightest exaggeration that the fundamental axioms of logic 
and mathematics are correct only so long as logic and mathematics operate with 
artificial, conditional units which do not exist in nature. 
The truth is that there are no finite, constant magnitudes in nature, just as there are 
no concepts. A finite, constant magnitude and a concept are conditional abstractions; 
they are not reality but, so to speak, sections of reality. 
How to connect the idea of the absence of constant magnitudes with the idea of a 
static universe? At the first glance, the one contradicts the other. But in actual fact this 
contradiction does not exist. Not this one, but the greater universe is static, the world of 
many dimensions of which we know the eternally moving section called the three­
dimensional infinite sphere. In addition, the very concepts of motion and immobility 
need to be reconsidered, because in the way our mind usually understands them, they 
do not correspond to reality. 
We have already examined in detail how the idea of motion results from our sense 
of time, i.e. from the imperfection of our sense of space. 
If our space-sense were more perfect, then, in relation to any given object, say to a 
given human body, we would perceive the whole of its life in time, from birth to death. 
Then within the limits of this compass it would be for us a constant magnitude. But 
now, at every moment of its life it is for us not a constant, but a variable magnitude. 
And what we call the body does not actually exist. It is only a section of a four­
dimensional body which we never see. We must remember that all our three­
dimensional world actually does not exist. It is the creation of our imperfect senses, the 
result of their imperfection. It is not the world; it is only what we see of the world. The 
three-

[PAG 225]
dimensional world is the four-dimensional world observed through the 
narrow slit of our senses. Therefore all the magnitudes we accept as such in 
the three-dimensional world, are not real magnitudes, but are only artificially 
assumed. 
They have no real existence, just as the present has no real existence. This 
has already been said. What we call the present is the transition from the 
future into the past. But this transition has no extension. Consequently, the 
present does not exist. Only the future and the past exist. 
Thus constant magnitudes in the three-dimensional world are abstractions; 
just as motion in three-dimensional world is in actual fact an abstraction. In 
the three-dimensional world there is no change, no motion. For the 
conception of motion we need a four-dimensional world. The three­
dimensional world does not exist in reality, or it exists only during one ideal 
moment. In another ideal moment there is already another three-dimensional 
world. Consequently, magnitude A is no longer A the next moment, but 
becomes B; the next moment it is C and so on, ad infinitum. It is equal to
itself only during one ideal moment. In other words, within the limits of one 
ideal moment the axioms of mathematics are valid; for the comparison of two 
ideal moments they are only conditional, just as Bacon's logic is conditional 
compared to the logic of Aristotle. In time, i.e. in relation to magnitudes 
which are variable from the point of view of the ideal moment, they are 
incorrect. 
The idea of constancy or variability is the outcome of the incapacity of our 
limited mind to know a thing otherwise than in the form of its section. But if 
we achieve the knowledge of a thing in four dimensions, say a human body
from birth to death, it will be a whole and constant magnitude, a section of 
which we call the human body changing in time. A moment of life, i.e. the 
body as we know it in the three-dimensional world, is a point on an infinite 
line. If we could know this body as a whole, we would know it as an 
absolutely constant magnitude with all its variety of forms, states and 
positions. But in that case the axioms of our mathematics would not be 
applicable to this constant magnitude, because it would be an infinite 
magnitude. 
This infinite magnitude we cannot know. We always know only its 
section. And to this imaginary section of the universe belong our 
mathematics and logic.

[PAG 226]
CHAPTER 21  
Necessity of abandoning our phenomenal logic for a noumenal approach. Science 
must recognize that only through poetry and mysticism do we approach the world of 
causes. Preparation through faith and love are necessary to overcome the terror of 
infinity. The real meaning of 'Poor in spirit'. The Organon of Aristotle, the Novum 
Organum of Bacon and Tertium Organum which, though often forgotten, existed 
before the others and is a key to the hidden side of life. Necessity of discarding our 
two-dimensional 'idols' and attempting to enumerate the properties of the world of 
causes. 
Everything said about mathematical magnitudes refers also to logical 
concepts. Finite mathematical magnitudes and logical concepts are subject to 
the same laws. 
We have now made it clear that laws discovered by us in three-dimensional 
space and operating in this space are inapplicable, incorrect and untrue in a 
space of a greater number of dimensions. 
This is equally true in mathematics and in logic. 
As soon as, instead of finite and constant magnitudes, we begin to examine 
infinite and variable magnitudes, we see that the fundamental axioms of our 
mathematics cannot refer to them. 
And as soon as, instead of concepts, we being to think in other terms, we 
must be prepared to meet with an enormous number of absurdities from the 
point of view of existing logic.
They would seem absurdities to us because we approach the many­
dimensional world with the logic of the three-dimensional world. 
It was shown earlier that for an animal, i.e. for a two-dimensional being
thinking not by concepts but by representations, our logical propositions are 
bound to seem absurd. 
The logical relations in the world of many dimensions appear just as absurd 
to us. There is no reason whatever for hoping that in the world of causes 
relations can be logical from our point of view. On the contrary, we may say
that EVERYTHING LOGICAL is only phenomenal. On the other side there can be 
nothing logical from our point of view. Everything that exists there is bound 
to appear to us a logical absurdity, nonsense. And we must remember that we 
cannot orientate ourselves there with our logic.

[PAG 227]
The attitude of human thought in its main trends to the 'world beyond' was always 
entirely wrong. 
The 'world beyond' of the spiritualists, in all the existing versions of it, is but a naive 
and primitive representation of the unknown. 
In 'positivism' people have denied the world beyond altogether, because, refusing to 
admit the possibility of logical relations other than those formulated by Aristotle and 
Bacon, people denied the very existence of anything that appeared senseless and 
impossible from the point of view of these formulae. And in 'spiritualism' they 
attempted to build a noumenal world on the pattern of the phenomenal, i.e. against 
reason, in defiance of the forces of nature, they wanted at all costs to prove that the 
world beyond is logical from our point of view, that the same laws of causation operate 
there as in our world, and that the world beyond is nothing more than a continuation of 
ours. 
Positivist philosophy saw the absurdity of dualistic theses, but, unable to widen the 
field of its activity limited by logic and the 'infinite sphere', it could not think of 
anything better than DENIAL. 
Only mystical philosophy felt the possibility of relations other than these of the 
phenomenal world. But it dwelt on vague and nebulous sensations, unable to define or 
classify them. 
Science must come to mysticism, and then to the study of forms of consciousness ­
and consequently of perception - other than ours. Science must throw off almost 
everything old and must start from a new theory of cognition, for mysticism offers a 
new approach. 
Science cannot deny the fact that mathematics grows, widens and passes beyond the 
boundaries of the visible and measurable world. Whole sections of mathematics 
examine quantitative relations which do not exist and never existed in the real world of 
positivism, i.e. relations to which there are no corresponding realities in the visible, i.e. 
the three-dimensional world. 
But there cannot be any mathematical relations for which there would be no 
corresponding realities at all. Consequently, mathematics transcends the boundaries of 
this world and peeps into the world of the unknown. It is a telescope by means of 
which we begin to investigate the space of many dimensions with its worlds. 
Mathematics goes in the vanguard of our thought, in the vanguard of our powers of 
imagination and representation. It already calculates relationships which we are totally 
incapable of imagining or even thinking about. 
All this cannot be denied even from the strictly 'positivist', i.e. positive point of 
view. And, having admitted the possibility of widening the field of mathematics 
beyond the limits of the world

[PAG 228]
known through the senses, i.e. beyond the limits of the world accessible (be it only 
theoretically) to the organs of sense and to apparatus, science must, by this very fact, 
admit the expansion of the real world far beyond the limits of the 'infinite sphere' and 
logic. In other words it must recognize the reality of the 'world of many dimensions'. 
The recognition of the reality of the world of many dimensions is an already 
accomplished transition to the understanding and the recognition of the world of the 
'miraculous'. And a transition to the miraculous is impossible without admitting the 
reality of new logical relations, absurd and impossible from the point of view of our 
logic. 
What are the laws of our logic? 
They are the laws of our perception of the three-dimensional world or the laws of 
our three-dimensional perception of the world. 
If we want to leave the three-dimensional world behind and advance further, we 
must first of all evolve some fundamental logical principles which would enable us to 
observe the relationships of things in the world of many dimensions and see in them a 
certain orderly interdependence rather than complete absurdity. If we enter there with 
logical principles of the three-dimensional world, they will drag us back, will not allow 
us to rise above the ground. We must first of all, throw off the fetters of our logic. This 
is the first, the great and the principal liberation towards which humanity should strive. 
A man who has thrown off the fetters of 'three-dimensional logic', has already passed in 
thought into another world. And this transition is not only possible but is being 
constantly accomplished. Unfortunately, we are not entirely aware of our rights to the 
'other world' and often lose these rights, considering ourselves locked into this 
terrestrial world. And yet ways leading there exist. Poetry, mysticism, idealistic 
philosophy of all ages and peoples preserve traces of such transition. Following these 
traces we also can find the way. Ancient and modern thinkers have left us many keys 
with which we can unlock the mysterious doors, and many magical formulae before 
which these doors open by themselves. But we failed to understand the purpose of 
either the keys or the formulae; and we have lost the understanding of magical 
ceremonies and rituals of initiation in the Mysteries, which pursued only one aim - to 
help this transition in man's soul. 
And so the doors have remained locked, and we even deny that there is anything 
behind these doors. Or, suspecting the existence of another world, we regard it as 
similar to ours and separate from ours, and attempt to penetrate it without realizing that 
the chief obstacle on

[PAG 229]
our path is our own division of the world into this world and the world 
beyond. 
The world is one - but the means of perceiving it are different. And with 
imperfect means of perception it is impossible to penetrate into that which is 
accessible only to the perfect. 
Attempts with the logic of the phenomenal world to penetrate in thought 
into the world beyond, the world of noumena, the world of causes, if they did 
not prove a complete failure or did not lead a man to the world of waking
dreams, gave one result only. - Conscious of the new order of things man lost 
the sense of the reality of the old order. The visible world began to appear to 
him fantastic, unreal; everything vanished around him, disappeared like 
smoke, leaving a terrifying sensation of illusion. He felt in everything the 
abyss of infinity, and everything pouring away into this abyss. 
The sensation of infinity is the first and most terrifying trial before 
initiation. There is nothing! The small insignificant soul feels itself suspended 
in an infinite void. Then even the soul itself ceases to exist. There is nothing ­
there is only infinity, the constant and continuous breaking up and dissolution 
of everything. In the mystical literature of all peoples there are references to 
this sensation of void and darkness. 
The mysterious deity of the ancient Egyptians, mentioned in the Orphic 
myths* was: 'The thrice-unknown darkness in contemplation of which all 
knowledge is resolved into ignorance.' 
This means that, approaching the world of causes with nothing but the 
knowledge of the world of phenomena, with his own instrument of logic
which proved futile because all the new eluded him, a man was bound to 
experience a terror surpassing all limits. In the new he felt as yet nothing but 
chaos, the old was vanishing, receding, becoming unreal. Terror and regret at
the loss of the old was mingling with the fear of the new, the unknown, 
terrifying in its infinity. 
At this stage a man goes through the same experience as that of an animal 
in becoming a man. After a momentary glimpse of the new world it is 
dragged back by life. The world it has glimpsed for a short moment seems a 
dream, a fantasy, a creation of its imagination. But the old world of the past is 
no longer the same either, it becomes narrow, there is no longer any room in 
it. The awakening consciousness can no longer lead the same wild and free 
life of a beast. It already 
* Annie Besant, The Ancient Wisdom, Theosophical Publishing House, Adyar, 
1939, Introduction.

[PAG 230]
knows something, hears some voices. And at the same time the body holds it. And it 
does not know where and how it can escape it or escape from itself. 
A man on the threshold of the new world has exactly the same experience. He has 
heard the music of heaven, and the dull songs of the earth no longer touch or move 
him; or, if they do touch and move him, it is because they speak to him of heavenly 
sounds, of the unattainable, of the unknown. He has experienced a feeling of an 
extraordinary EXPANSION of consciousness, when for a moment everything was clear to 
him, and he cannot reconcile himself to the slow earthly working of the brain. 
Moments of 'sensation of infinity' are connected with quite special emotions. 
In 'theosophical' literature and in books on occultism it is often said that, passing 
into the 'astral' world man begins to see new colours, colours which are not in the solar 
spectrum.* This symbolism of the new colours of the 'astral sphere' conveys precisely 
the thought about the new emotions which a man begins to experience together with 
the sensations of an expanded consciousness - 'the ocean being absorbed by a drop'. 
This is the 'incredible bliss' of which mystics speak, the heavenly light which the saints 
'see', the 'new sensations' which poets experience. Even conversational psychology 
connects 'ecstasy' with completely unusual new sensations, inaccessible and unknown 
to man in ordinary life. 
This sensation of light and infinite joy is experienced in moments of expansion of 
consciousness (the unfolding of the mystic lotus of the Indian Yogi), at the moment of 
the sensation of infinity which produces, at the same time, the sensation of darkness 
and boundless terror. 
What does it mean? 
How to reconcile the sensation of light with the sensation of darkness, the sensation 
of joy with the sensation of terror? Can it be simultaneous? Does it happen 
simultaneously? 
It does happen and it has got to be so. Mystical literature gives us examples of this. 
The simultaneous sensation of light and darkness, joy and terror seems to symbolize 
the strange duality and contradiction of human life. It can happen to a man who is very 
sharply divided, with one side of his nature gone far into the 'spirit' and the other side 
deeply sunk in 'matter', i.e. in illusion, in unreality; with too profound a faith in the 
reality of the unreal. 
* Although it must be remembered that we see only three of the seven colours of 
the solar spectrum.

[PAG 231]
Speaking generally, the new world gives the sensation of light, of life, of 
all-pervading consciousness, of joy. . . . But to a mind which is not prepared 
the same world will give a sensation of infinite darkness and terror. 
Moreover, the sensation of terror must come from the loss of everything real, 
from the disappearance of this world. 
In order not to experience the terror of the new world, it is necessary to
know it beforehand, either emotionally - through faith and love, or 
intellectually - by reason. 
And in order not to experience terror at the loss of the old world, one 
should renounce it voluntarily beforehand, also either through faith or reason. 
It is necessary to renounce voluntarily all the beautiful bright world we live 
in, to admit that it is a mirage, a phantom, an unreality, deceit, illusion, may 
a. One should become reconciled to this unreality, not be afraid of it but 
rejoice in it. One should be stripped of everything. One should become POOR 
IN SPIRIT, i.e. make oneself poor by an effort of one's spirit. 
The beautiful Gospel symbol expresses the deepest philosophical truth: 
Blessed are the poor in spirit for theirs is the kingdom 
of heaven. 
These words become clear only if taken in the sense of renunciation of the 
material world. 'Poor in spirit' does not mean poor in the material sense, in 
the everyday meaning of the word; and it certainly does not mean poverty of 
the spirit. Spiritual poverty is renunciation of matter, such 'poverty' when a 
man has no ground under his feet and no sky over his head. 
Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests, But the Son of 
man hath not where to lay his head. 
This is the kind of poverty when a man is completely alone, because he 
begins to see other people, even the most near to him, his father, his mother, 
not as he saw them before, but differently, and renounces them because he 
sees real entities towards which he strives, just as in renouncing the 
phenomenal phantasm of the world he approaches that which is truly real.
The moment of transition, the terrible moment of the loss of the old and the 
unfolding of the new was depicted in ancient literature in an infinite number 
of allegories. The purpose of the Mysteries was to make this transition easier. 
In India, in Egypt, in Greece there existed special preparatory rituals, 
sometimes only symbolical, sometimes

[PAG 232]
real, actually leading the soul to the very doors of the new world, and opening these 
doors at the moment of initiation. But external rites and ceremonies could not by 
themselves create initiation. The chief work had to go on within the soul and the mind 
of man. 
How then can logic help man to pass to the consciousness of this new higher world? 
We have seen that mathematics has already found a way into this higher order of 
things. Penetrating there, it first of all renounces its fundamental axioms of identity and 
difference. 
In the world of infinite and fluid magnitudes a magnitude can be not equal to itself; 
a part may be equal to the whole; and of equal magnitudes one may be infinitely 
greater than another. 
All this sounds like an absurdity from the point of view of the mathematics of finite 
and constant numbers. But the very mathematics of finite and constant numbers is a 
calculation of relationships among non-existent magnitudes, i.e. an absurdity. 
Therefore, only that which seems an absurdity from the point of view of this 
mathematics can be the truth. 
Logic goes through the same process. It has to renounce itself, arrive at the necessity 
of its own annihilation - and then a new and higher logic may arise from it. 
In his Critique of Pure Reason Kant proved the possibility of a transcendental logic. 
Before Bacon and before Aristotle, in ancient Indian scriptures there were given 
formulae of that higher logic which unlocked the doors of the mysteries. But the 
meaning of these formulae was soon lost. They were preserved in ancient books, but 
only as some strange mummies of extinct thought, words without real content. 
New thinkers again re-discovered these principles, expressed them in new words. 
But again they remained not understood, again they turned into some useless verbal 
ornament. But the idea continued. Belief was never lost in the possibility of finding and 
establishing the laws of the higher world. Mystical philosophy never regarded 
Aristotelean logic as all embracing or omnipotent. It built its systems outside logic or 
above logic, unconsciously, following the lines of thought laid down in the deepest 
antiquity. 
Higher logic existed before deductive and inductive logic was ever formulated. 
Higher logic may be called intuitive logic, the logic of infinity, the logic of ecstasy. 
This logic is not only possible, but it exists, and has existed from time immemorial; 
it was formulated many times; it entered as a key