=== Tertium Organum (P. D. Ouspensky).pdf — CHUNK 7/18 ===
Chars: 43,372 | Offset: 266,554



[PAG 112]
representatives, SCIENCE, in the last decades has, after all, touched upon 
problems of higher dimensions, and in such cases arrived at results almost 
identical with those expounded in the preceding chapters. 
In December 1911 the Second Mendeleev Convention was opened by a 
paper read by Professor N. A. Oumoff, devoted to problems of time and 
higher dimensions, under the title: The Characteristic Features and Problems 
of Contemporary Natural-scientific Thought'.
Professor N. A. Oumoff's paper, in spite of a certain incomplete-ness, is an 
event of great magnitude in the realm of science and will doubtless be, in 
time, recorded in the history of the development of exact knowledge as an 
unusually bold and outstanding attempt to proclaim, in the citadel of 
positivism which the Mendeleev Convention should have been, new ideas, 
which, in their essence, refute positivism in its entirety.
However, inertia and routine were bound to do their work. Professor N. A. 
Oumoff's paper was heard among a number of other papers, was duly 
published in the proceedings of the Convention and remained there, utterly
failing to produce the effect of a bombshell which it should have done had 
the listeners been more able, and above all more willing, to appreciate its real 
meaning and significance. 
Of course, the weakening of the significance of Professor Oumoff's paper 
was to a great extent due to certain reservations and limitations made by
himself, to the title of the paper, which failed to express its substance, and to 
its general tendency, striving to demonstrate that science is proceeding in a 
new direction, instead of stating the plain fact that the new direction goes 
against science. 
Professor N. A. Oumoff died in 1916, and I have no desire to impose upon
him thoughts he did not share. I had a talk with him in January 1912 which 
showed me that he stood, as it were, midway between ideas of the fourth 
dimension very akin to those expounded by me in the first edition of Tertium 
Organum, and physical theories still recognizing motion as an independent 
fact. What I mean is that while he recognized time as the fourth dimension of 
space, Professor Oumoff did not regard motion as an illusion of our 
consciousness, but admitted the reality of motion in the world, as a fact 
independent of us and our mental make-up. 
I point this out because, later, I shall quote extracts from Professor 
Oumoff's paper, choosing mainly those pans which contain ideas almost 
identical with the thoughts expressed by me in the preceding chapters. 
I shall not deal with the greater part of the paper, depicting the

[PAG 113]
evolution of modern physics from atom to electron, for this seems to me somewhat 
artificially joined to the ideas on which I would like to dwell, and has no inner 
connection with them. 
From my point of view it is immaterial whether the atom or the electron is placed at 
the basis of matter. In my opinion, the basis of matter is illusion, or, in other words, the 
form of representation. And a consistent development of the ideas of higher space, 
which Professor Oumoff placed at the foundation of his paper, should, in my opinion, 
lead to the negation of motion, just as a consistent development of the ideas of 
mathematical physics led to the negation of matter, as a substance. 
Having mentioned electrons, I should add that there is a means of reconciling the 
latest scientific ideas with the data of the psychological method; namely, by means of 
the very ancient systems of the Kabala, alchemy and others, which put at the 
foundation of the material world four principles or four elements, of which the first 
two, fire and water, correspond to the positive and negative electrons of modern 
physics. 
But, for this electrons should be taken not simply as electromagnetic units, but as 
principles, i.e. as two opposing principles constituting the world. 
Professor Oumoff's paper is interesting and noteworthy in that it already stands on 
the very threshold of metaphysics. Maybe the only thing that stands in his way is the 
lingering faith in the value of the positivist method, which in fact dies when the new 
watchwords of knowledge are proclaimed. 
The introduction to our forthcoming work [says Professor N. A. Oumoff] should be, 
most properly, devoted to the experiences of scientific thought in its search for the 
image of the world. The urgent need of scientific work along these lines will be clear, 
if we turn to the precepts of our great pioneers of science. . . . These precepts 
represent the deep motives of an active service to natural science and to mankind. It is 
useful to express them in our times when thought is mainly directed towards 
questions of organization of life. . . . Let us remember the profession of faith of the 
natural scientist: 
To affirm man's power over energy, time, space. . . . To know the architecture of the 
world and, in this knowledge, to find a basis for creative foresight. . . . This foresight 
inspires confidence that natural science will not fail to continue the great and 
responsible work of creating, in the midst of old nature, a new nature adapted to the 
increased requirements of mankind. 
New nature has become a vital necessity in individual and public activity. But its 
grandeur and its power seem to bring contentment to our thought.

[PAG 114]
The need for stability in daily life and the brevity of personal experience as 
compared with the evolution of the earth, lead men to faith, and create the mirage of 
the stability of the surrounding order of things not only in the present, but also in the 
future. The creators of natural science do not share this tranquil point of view, and to 
this circumstance natural science owes its constant development. I venture to lift this 
brilliant and familiar veil and to reveal the innermost recesses of scientific thought, 
poised on the dividing line between two conceptions of the world. 
The steersman of science should be constantly vigilant, notwithstanding the 
prosperity of his voyage; stars should constantly shine above him, by which he plots 
his course in the ocean of the unknown. 
At the present time, the constellations in the sky of our science have changed, and 
a new star has shone forth, having no equal in brilliance. 
Persistent scientific investigation has expanded the volume of the knowable to 
dimensions which were inconceivable even a short while -twenty or fifteen years ­
ago. Number still remains the legislator of nature, but, being capable of 
representation, it has eluded the conception of the world which considered it 
possible to represent the world by mechanical models. 
The new that has been discovered provides a sufficient number of images for the 
construction of the world, but they destroy its old architecture, familiar to us, and 
can only be incorporated in a new order, the free lines of which extend far beyond 
the limits not only of the old external world, but also beyond the fundamental forms 
of our thinking. 
I have to lead you to the summits from which open up perspectives which 
fundamentally re-form our idea of the world. 
The ascent towards them, amid the ruins of classical physics, presents 
considerable difficulties, and I beg your indulgence in advance and shall endeavour 
to simplify and shorten our path, as far as it is possible. 
Further, Professor Oumoff draws the picture of the evolution of form 'from atom to 
electron', from material and mechanical ideas of the universe to electro-magnetic ideas: 
The axioms of mechanics are but fragments, and making use of them is equivalent to 
judging about the content of a whole chapter by means of a single sentence. 
It is not surprising, therefore, that the attempt at a mechanical explanation of the 
properties of electro-magnetic ether by means of axioms in which these properties 
are either denied or are one-sidedly predetermined, proved a failure. . . . 
The mechanical conception of the world proved one-sided. . . . The image of the 
world had no unity. 
The electro-magnetic world could not remain as something alien, external, in 
relation to matter. The material conception of the world with its immutable 
foundations, had insufficient flexibility to allow fusion to take place with it and its 
principles. Only one way out remained-to sacrifice one of the worlds, either the 
material, mechanical world, or the

[PAG 115]
electro-magnetic world. It was imperative to find sufficient basis for one decision or 
the other. This was not slow in presenting itself. 
The subsequent development of physics is a process against matter, which ended in 
its rejection. But, side by side with this negative activity proceeded the creative work 
of reforming the electro-magnetic symbolism; 
it had to be capable of representing the properties of the material world, its atomic 
structure, momentum, radiation and absorption of energy, electromagnetic 
phenomena. . . . 
On the horizon of scientific thought was rising the electronic theory of matter. 
Through electrical units a connection was disclosed between matter and vacuum. . 
. . 
The idea of a special sub-stratum, filling the vacuum - ether - is superfluous. . . . 
Light and heat are born from the movements of electrons. They are the suns of the 
microcosmos. . . . 
The universe consists of positive and negative units, bound together by electro­
magnetic fields. 
Matter has disappeared; its variety is replaced by systems of electrical units, akin 
to one another and, in the place of the customary, material world, there takes shape 
before us the vastly different electro-magnetic world. 
But even the recognition of the electro-magnetic world has not disposed of many 
insoluble problems and difficulties; the necessity of a unifying system was felt. 
In our arduous ascent we have reached the point [says Professor Oumoff] where 
the road divides. One stretches out horizontally towards the plain which we have just 
depicted; the other leads towards the last summit, which is already visible and the 
ascent is not steep. 
Let us examine the point we have reached. It is very dangerous; more than one 
theory has been wrecked on it. It is all the more dangerous because its subtlety is 
hidden by the mask of simplicity. Its foundations are the experimental attempts 
which gave a negative answer to the investigations of thorough and skilled 
observers. 
Professor Oumoff points out the contradictions which resulted from some of the 
experiments. The need to explain these contradictions gave impetus to the finding of a 
unifying principle; this was the principle of relativity. 
The deductions of Lorentz, made in 1909 and referring mainly to electro-optical 
phenomena, gave the impetus to the publication by Albert Einstein of a new principle, 
and to its remarkable generalization by the recently deceased Hermann Minkowsky. 
We are approaching the summit of modern physics: it is occupied by the principle of 
relativity, the expression of which is so simple that its all-important significance is not 
immediately evident. It says; the laws of phenomena in a system of bodies, for an 
observer connected with it, appear

[PAG 116]
to be the same whether the system is at rest or is moving uniformly and rectilinearly. 
It follows hence that, by the aid of phenomena taking place in a system of bodies 
with which he is connected, an observer is unable to discover whether this system 
possesses a uniform progressive motion or not. 
Thus, no phenomenon taking place on earth enables us to discern its progressive 
motion in space. 
The principle of relativity includes in itself the observing intellect, which is a 
circumstance of the greatest importance. The intellect is connected with a complex 
physical instrument - the nervous system. Consequently, this principle gives 
indications concerning things which take place in moving bodies, not only in 
relation to physical and chemical phenomena, but also in relation to phenomena of 
life, and therefore also to the quest of man. It is remarkable as an example of a thesis 
based on strictly scientific experiment in the purely physical domain, which bridges 
the gulf between two worlds generally considered to be of different nature. 
Professor Oumoff gives examples of explaining complex phenomena by means of 
the principle of relativity. And he further shows how the most enigmatic problems of 
life are explained from the point of view of electro-magnetic theories and the principle 
of relativity, and, finally, comes to what is especially interesting for us: 
All spatial measurements involve time. We cannot define the geometrical form 
of a solid moving in relation to us; we always define its kinematic form. 
Therefore our spatial measurements actually take place not in a three-
dimensional manifold, i.e. one possesssing three dimensions of height, width 
and depth, such as this hall, but in a four-dimensional manifold. We can 
represent the first three dimensions by three tape measures upon which are 
marked feet, yards or other measures of length. We represent the fourth 
dimension by a cinematographic reel, on which each point corresponds to a 
new phase of the phenomena of the world. The distance between the points 
of this reel is measured by a clock which goes uniformly at any speed. One 
observer will measure the distance between two points by one year, another 
by a hundred years. The passage from one point on this reel to another 
corresponds to our conception of the flow of time. Therefore we shall call this 
fourth dimension - time. The cinematographic reel can replace the reel of any 
of the tape measures and vice versa. The mathematical genius Minkowsky, 
so prematurely deceased, has proved that all these four dimensions are 
equivalent. How to understand this? Those who came from Moscow to St 
Petersburg passed through Tver. They are no longer at that station, never-
theless it exists. In the same way, a moment which corresponded to some 
event, already past, as, for instance, to the birth of life on earth, has not 
disappeared but exists. It is not outlived by the universe, but only by the earth. 
The place of this event in a four-dimensional universe is defined by a certain 
point, and this point has existed, exists and will continue to exist. At present 
another wanderer is passing through it - through this station passed by the 
earth. Time does not flow, just as space does not flow. It is we that flow, 
wanderers in a four-dimensional universe. Time is as much a dimen-

[PAG 117]
sion of space as height, width and length If we interchange them in the expression of 
some law of nature, we still arrive at this law 
The new ideas are embodied by Minkowsky in an elegant mathematical theory, we 
shall not enter the majestic temple erected by his genius, a voice proclaims from 
there 
'In the universe all is given for it there is no past or future, it is - the eternal 
present, it has no limits either in space or in time Changes take place in 
individualities and correspond to their displacements along the world ways in the 
four-dimensional, eternal and boundless manifold In the domain of philosophic 
thought these ideas should produce a greater revolution than the displacement of the 
earth from the centre of the universe by Copernicus'* From the tunes of Newton, 
natural science has never been faced with more brilliant perspectives Is not the 
power of natural science blazoned forth in the transition from the indisputable 
experimental fact -the impossibility of determining the absolute motion of the earth ­
to problems of the mind! A contemporary philosopher exclaimed in confusion 
'Beyond truth and falsehood!' 
When the cult of a new god is born, his word is not always clearly understood; the 
true meaning becomes revealed in time I think that the same is true also as regards 
the principle of relativity. 
The elimination of anthropomorphism from scientific ideas has rendered an 
enormous service to science. 
The principle of relativity follows the same path, showing the dependence of our 
observations on the general conditions of phenomena. 
The electro-magnetic theory of the world and the principle of relativity explain 
only those phenomena, the place of which is determined by the part of the universe 
occupied by matter; the remaining part, which appears to our senses as a vacuum, 
still remains outside science. But the shores of the material world are constantly 
bathed by the surf of energy coming from that agitated ocean which is empty for our 
senses but not for our reason. 
Is not the dualism of matter and vacuum an anthropomorphism and, moreover, the 
last one in science? Let us put the fundamental question. What part of the universe is 
filled by matter? Let us surround our planetary system by a sphere, the radius of 
which is equal to half the distance between the sun and the nearest stars: the length 
of this radius is traversed by a ray of light in a year and a half Let us accept the 
volume of this sphere as the volume of our world. Now, starting from the sun, as the 
centre, let us trace another, a lesser, sphere, the radius of which is equal to the 
distance between our sun and the furthest planet. I presume that the matter of our 
world, concentrated in one place, will not take more than one tenth of the volume of 
the planetary sphere: I think that this figure is considerably exaggerated. Calculation 
of volumes will show that in our world the volume filled with matter relates to the 
volume of vacuum as one to a number represented by the figures 3 with 13 noughts. 
This relationship corresponds to the relationship of one second to a million years. 
According to Lord Kelvin's calculation, the density of matter corresponding to 
such a relationship would be ten thousand million times less dense than water, i.e. it 
would be at the furthest limit of rarefaction. 
* My italics - P D Ouspensky

[PAG 118]
Professor Oumoff gives an example of a number of spheres corresponding to the 
number of seconds in a million years. On one of these spheres (corresponding to the 
matter in the universe) is inscribed all we know, because all we do know refers to 
matter. And matter is only one sphere among millions and millions of 'spheres of 
vacuum': 
The conclusion arrived at [he says] is this: Matter represents a highly improbable 
event in the universe. 
This event came into being because improbability does not mean impossibility. 
But where and in what manner are realized more probable events? Is it in the domain 
of radiant energy? 
The theory of probability embraces an immense part of the universe -the vacuum ­
in the world of becoming. We know that radiant energy possesses gravitational mass. 
Among the varied phenomena in the world of intercrossing rays, do not their 
elements attracted to one another give birth to tiny particles, the accumulation of 
which constitutes our material world? 
Could it be that vacuum is the laboratory of matter? 
The material world is the limited horizon which opens up before a man who has 
come out into a field. For his senses life is teeming only within the limits of this 
horizon; outside it, for man's senses, is only vacuum. 
I do not want to start a polemic against those thoughts in Professor Oumoff's paper 
with which I do not agree. Still, I shall point out and enumerate the questions which 
arise, in my opinion, from the incompatibility of some premises. 
The antithesis between vacuum and the material world sounds almost naive after the 
just-quoted words of Minkowsky about the necessity for science to pass to the 
questions of the mind when dealing with purely physical problems. Further, I see no 
essential difference between the material or mechanical and the electromagnetic 
universe. All this is three-dimensional. In the electromagnetic universe there is, as yet, 
no proper transition to the fourth dimension. And Professor Oumoff makes only one 
unquestionable attempt to connect the electro-magnetic world with higher dimensions. 
He says: 
The sheet of paper, covered with electro-magnetic symbols, which we have used as a 
cover for the vacuum, may be regarded as milliards of separate superimposed sheets 
each of which represents the field of one small electric quantity or charge. 
This is all. The rest is, after all, as three-dimensional as the theory of atoms and ether. 
'We are present at the funeral of old physics', says Professor

[PAG 119]
Oumoff. And this is true. But old physics becomes lost and disappears not in electro­
magnetic theories, but in ideas of a new extension of space which, so far, we have 
called time and motion. The physics that is truly new will be the physics which does 
not contain motion, i.e. in which there is no dualism of rest and motion, and no dualism 
of matter and vacuum. 
By taking the universe as thought and consciousness, we become completely free of 
the idea of vacuum. And this point of view explains the small probability of matter, to 
which Professor Oumoff has arrived. Matter, i.e. everything finite, is an illusion in the 
infinite world.* 
Out of the numerous psychological attempts to investigate the fourth dimension I 
shall dwell also on the book by Johan van Manen, Some Occult Experiences.** 
This book contains a remarkable drawing of a four-dimensional body, which the 
author 'saw' by his inner vision. This interesting experience is described by van Manen 
in the following way: 
When residing and touring in the North of England, several years ago, I talked and 
lectured several times on the fourth dimension. One day after having retired to bed, I 
lay fully awake, thinking out some problem connected with this subject. I tried to 
visualize or think out the shape of a fourth-dimensional cube, which I imagined to be 
the simplest fourth-dimensional shape. To my great astonishment I saw plainly before 
me first a fourth-dimensional globe and afterwards a fourth-dimensional cube, and 
learned only then from this object lesson that the globe is the simplest body, and not 
the cube, as the third-dimensional analogy ought to have told me beforehand. The 
remarkable thing was that the definite endeavour to see the one thing made me see the 
other. I saw the forms as before me in the air (though the room was dark), and behind 
the forms I saw clearly a rift in the curtains through which a glimmer of light filtered 
into the room. This was a case in which I can clearly fix the impression that the 
objects seen were outside my head. In most of the other cases I could not say so 
definitely, as they partake of a dual character, being almost equally felt as outside and 
inside the brain. 
I forgo the attempt to describe the fourth-dimensional cube as to its form. 
Mathematical description would be possible, but would at the same time disintegrate 
the real impression in its totality. The fourth-dimensional globe can be better 
described. It was an ordinary three-dimensional globe, out of which on each side, 
beginning at its vertical circumference, bent tapering horns proceeded, which, with a 
circular bend, united their points above the globe from which they started. 
* A. Einstein's book on relativity, which has since appeared, makes it possible to 
become better acquainted with the scientific (physical) treatment of this question. 
** Some Occult Experiences described by Johan van Manen and annotated by C. 
W. Leadbeater, Theosophical Publishing House, Adyar, Madras, India, 1913.

[PAG 120]
So three circles are formed, the lower one representing the initial globe, the upper 
one representing empty space, and the greater circle circumscribing the whole. If it 
be now understood that the upper circle [empty space] does not exist and the lower 
(small) circle is identical with the outer (large) circle, the impression will have been 
conveyed, at least to some extent. . .I have always been easily able to recall this 
globe, to recall the cube is far more difficult, and I have to concentrate to get it back. 
I have in a like manner had rare visions of fifth- and sixth-dimensional figures. At 
least I have felt as if the figures I saw were fifth- and sixth-dimensional. In these 
matters the greatest caution is necessary. I am aware that I have come into contact 
with these things as far as the physical brain allows it, without denying that beyond 
what the brain has caught there was something further, felt at the time, which was not 
handed on The sixth-dimensional figure I cannot describe. All I remember of it is 
that it gave me at the time an impression in form of what we might call diversity in 
unity, or synthesis in differentiation The fifth-dimensional vision is best described, or 
rather hinted at, by saying that it looked like an Alpine relief map, with the 
singularity that all mountain peaks and the whole landscape represented in the map 
were one mountain,* or again, in other words, as if all the mountains had one single 
base. This was the difference between the fifth and sixth, and in the fifth the 
excrescences were in one sense exteriorized and yet rested in the same unit; but in 
the sixth they were differentiated but not exteriorized, they were only in different 
ways identical with the same base, which was their whole. 
In a note to these remarkable pages C. W. Leadbeater says: 
Striking as the drawing is [of a four-dimensional figure made by van Manen] its value 
lies chiefly in its suggestiveness to those who have once seen that which it represents. 
One can hardly hope that it will convey a clear idea of the reality to those who have 
never seen it. It is difficult to get an animal to understand a picture - apparently 
because he is incapable of grasping the idea that perspective on a flat surface is 
intended to represent objects which he knows only as solid The average man is in 
exactly the same position with regard to any drawing or model which is intended to 
* See Jacob Boehme's story, quoted by James, of a harp of many strings, of which 
each string is a separate instrument

[PAG 121]
suggest to him the idea of the fourth dimension; and so, clever and suggestive as it is, 
I doubt whether it will be of much help to the average reader. 
The man who has seen the reality might well be helped by this to bring into his 
ordinary life a flash of that higher consciousness; and in that case perhaps he might be 
able to supply, in his thought, what must necessarily be lacking in the physical-plane 
drawing. 
For my part I may say that the true meaning of van Manen's 'vision' is hard even to 
appreciate with the means at our disposal. When I saw in his book the drawing 
reproduced here, I at once understood and felt all that it means. But I disagreed 
somewhat with van Manen in the interpretation of this drawing. He writes: 
We may also call the total impression that of a ring. I think it was then [looking at the 
drawing] that I understood for the first time that so-called fourth-dimensional sight is 
sight with reference to a space-conception arising from the visual perception of 
density. 
In spite of all its caution, this remark seems to me dangerous, for it creates the 
possibility of the same mistake which has stopped Hinton in many things. This mistake 
consists in the possibility of constructing a certain pseudo-fourth dimension which, in 
actual fact, lies entirely in three dimensions. In my opinion the figure is full of motion. 
The whole figure seems to me moving, as though constantly arising in the meeting point 
of the sharp ends, spreading out from there and being re-absorbed there. But I shall not 
analyse and examine van Manen's experience now, leaving this to the readers who have 
had similar experiences. 
As regards van Manen's descriptions of his observations of the 'fifth' and the 'sixth' 
dimensions, it seems to me that nothing in them justifies the supposition that they refer 
to a domain higher and more complex than the four-dimensional world. 
In my opinion all this is no more than observations of the domain of the fourth 
dimension. But the remarkable thing in them is their similarity to the experiences of 
some mystics, especially those of Jacob Boehme. Moreover, the method of object­
lesson is very interesting, i.e. those two images which van Manen saw and from the 
comparison of which he drew his conclusions.

[PAG 122]
CHAPTER 12 
Analysis of phenomena. What determines for us different orders of phenomena? 
Methods and forms of the transition of phenomena of one order into another. 
Phenomena of motion. Phenomena of life. Phenomena of consciousness. The central 
question of our perception of the world: 
which kind of phenomena is primary and produces the others? Can motion lie at the 
beginning of everything? Laws of the transformation of energy. Simple 
transformation and the liberation of latent energy. Different liberating forces of 
different kinds of phenomena. The force of mechanical energy, the force of a living  
cell and the force of an idea. Phenomena and noumena of our world. 
The order of phenomena is determined for us, first, by our method of perception and,  
second, by the form of the transition of one kind of phenomena into another. 
We distinguish three kinds of phenomena according to our method of perception and 
the form of their transition into other phenomena. 
Physical phenomena (i.e. all phenomena studied by physics and chemistry).  
Phenomena of life (all phenomena studied by biology and its sub-divisions). 
Psychological phenomena (thoughts, feelings, etc.). 
We perceive physical phenomena by means of our sense-organs or by means of 
instruments. A great many recognized physical phenomena are not observed directly; 
they are only a projection of the presumed causes of our sensations, or the causes of 
other phenomena. Physics recognizes the existence of very many phenomena which  
have never been observed either by sense-organs or by instruments (for instance, the  
temperature of absolute zero, etc.). 
Phenomena of life are not observed as such. We cannot project them as the cause of 
definite sensations. But certain groups of sensations make us presume the presence of 
phenomena of life behind the groups of physical phenomena. It is possible to say that a  
certain grouping of physical phenomena makes us presume the presence of phenomena 
of life. We define the cause of phenomena of life as something imperceptible for the  
senses or for instruments and incommensurable with the causes of physical sensations. 
A sign of the presence of phenomena of life is the capacity of organisms to reproduce 
themselves, i.e. their multiplication in the same forms, the

[PAG 123]
indivisibility of individual units and their capacity of adaptation which is not 
observed outside of life. 
Psychological phenomena - feelings and thoughts - we know in ourselves 
by direct sensation, subjectively. We deduce their existence in others by 
analogy with ourselves; on the grounds of their manifestation in actions, and 
on the grounds of what we learn through communication by means of speech. 
But, as some philosophical theories point out, it is impossible to establish, 
strictly objectively, the presence of another consciousness, apart from one's 
own. A man usually establishes it on the grounds of an inner conviction. 
Physical phenomena pass one into another completely. Heat may be 
transformed into light; pressure, into motion, and so on; any physical 
phenomenon may be created out of other physical phenomena; any chemical 
compound may be reproduced synthetically by combining the component 
parts in the required proportions and under the required physical conditions. 
Modern physics presumes that at the basis of all physical phenomena lie 
electro-magnetic phenomena. But physical phenomena do not pass into 
phenomena of life. By no combination of physical conditions can science 
create life, just as by chemical synthesis it cannot create living matter, 
protoplasm. We can tell what amount of coal is needed to obtain the amount 
of heat necessary to transform a given quantity of ice into water. But we 
cannot tell what amount of coal is required to create the life energy by the aid 
of which one living cell forms another living cell. In the same way physical, 
chemical and mechanical phenomena cannot, by themselves, produce 
psychological phenomena. Were it otherwise, a rotating wheel, by expending
a certain amount of energy, or in the course of a certain period of time, would 
generate an idea. Yet we know quite well that a wheel may go on rotating for 
millions of years, but no idea will result from it. We see therefore that 
phenomena of motion are fundamentally different from the phenomena of life 
and consciousness. 
Phenomena of life pass into other phenomena of life, multiply in them 
infinitely and transform themselves into physical phenomena, producing a
whole series of mechanical and chemical combinations. The phenomena of 
life manifest themselves to us in physical phenomena and in the presence of 
such phenomena. 
Psychological phenomena are experienced directly and, having enormous 
potential force, pass into physical phenomena and into manifestations of life. 
We know that at the basis of our procreative force lies desire, i.e. a 
psychological state or a phenomenon of consciousness. Desire has a 
tremendous potential force. A whole people

[PAG 124]
may be produced by the combined desire of a man and a woman. At the basis of the 
active, constructive, creative force of man, capable of altering the course of rivers, 
joining oceans, carving mountains, lies desire, i.e. again a psychological state or a 
phenomenon of consciousness. Thus psychological phenomena possess a still greater 
combining power in relation to physical phenomena than do the phenomena of life. 
Positivist philosophy asserts that phenomena of life and psychological phenomena 
arise from one cause which lies within the sphere of physical studies. This cause is 
called by different names at different times, but is presumed to be identical with 
physical energy in general. 
Seriously analysing this assertion, it is impossible to avoid seeing that it is 
completely arbitrary and unfounded. Within the scope of our being and observation, 
physical phenomena never produce phenomena of life and consciousness. Therefore we 
are more justified in assuming that phenomena of life and phenomena of consciousness 
contain something which is absent in physical phenomena. 
Further, physical, biological and psychological phenomena cannot be measured by the 
same measure. Or, to be more exact, phenomena of life and phenomena of 
consciousness cannot be measured by us at all. And it is only the first, i.e. the physical 
phenomena, that we can assume to be measurable, though even that is very problematic. 
At any rate we know without doubt that neither phenomena of life nor psychological 
phenomena can be expressed by us in the formulae of physical phenomena; and, 
generally speaking, we have for them no formulae at all. 
If we wish to understand more clearly the mutual relationship of these different 
orders of phenomena, we must examine in greater detail the laws of their transition one 
into another. 
First of all we should consider the physical phenomena and make a detailed study of 
all the conditions and characteristics of their transition one into another. 
In an article on Wundt (The Northern Messenger, 1888) A. L. Volinsky, expounding 
the principles of Wundt's physiological psychology, writes: 
The actions of sensation are called the actions of irritation. But these two actions need 
not be at all equal. One can burn down a whole town by a spark from a cigarette. One 
should understand why this is possible. Balance a board on the edge of some object, 
in the manner of scales, and see that it is in equilibrium. Now place equal weights on 
each end of the board. The

[PAG 125]
weights will not fall; though they will lend to fall, they will balance each other. Now, 
if we take off the smallest weight from one end of the board, the other end will 
overbalance and the board will tip over, i.e. the force of gravity, which existed before 
as an invisible tendency, will become a visible driving force. But if we place the 
board with the weights on the ground, the force of gravity will no longer have an 
effect. Yet it will not be eliminated; it will merely be translated into other forces. The 
forces which are only tending to produce motion are called constrained or dead 
forces. The forces which are actually manifesting themselves in definite movements 
are called free or living forces. But, among the free forces it is necessary to dis­
tinguish the releasing, liberating forces from the forces which are released, liberated. 
There is an enormous difference between the liberation of a force and its 
transformation into another force. 
If one form of movement passes into another, the amount of free force remains the 
same. But, when one force liberates another, the amount of free force changes. The 
free force of irritation releases the constrained forces of a nerve. And this liberation 
of the constrained forces of a nerve lakes place at every point of the nerve. The first 
motion grows, like a fire, like an avalanche, bearing along with it new and ever new 
drifts of snow. This is why the action (phenomenon) of sensation need not be exactly 
equal to the action of irritation. 
Let us look more broadly at the relation of the freed and the freeing forces in 
different kinds of phenomena. 
We shall see that, at times, an insignificant amount of physical force can set free an 
enormous, colossal amount of energy, also physical. But all the amount of physical 
force we can gather together will not set free a single drop of life energy necessary for 
the independent existence of a microscopic living organism. 
The force contained in living organisms, the force of life, is capable of liberating 
infinitely great quantities of energy (compared with the force of motion), both life 
energy and simply physical energy. 
A microscopic living cell is capable of infinite dissemination, of developing into 
new forms, of covering continents with vegetation, of filling oceans with seaweed, of 
building islands out of coral, of leaving behind itself vast layers of coal, and so on. 
Concerning the latent energy contained in the phenomena of consciousness, i.e. in 
thoughts, in feelings, in desires, we see that the potentiality is still more immeasurable, 
still more limitless. From personal experience, from observation, from history we know 
that an idea, a feeling or a desire can, in manifesting, release boundless quantities of 
energy, create infinite series of phenomena. An idea may act for hundreds and 
thousands of years and only grow and deepen, producing ever-new series of 
phenomena, liberating ever-new energy. We know that thoughts continue to act and 
live when the very name of

[PAG 126]
the man who produced them has become a myth, such as the names of the 
founders of ancient religions, the creators of immortal poetical works of 
antiquity, heroes, leaders, prophets. Their works are repeated by innumerable 
lips, their ideas are analysed, commented on. The works which have been 
preserved are translated, published, read, learnt by heart, recited, staged, 
illustrated. And this is so not only with the great masterpieces of universal 
geniuses. A single little verse may live for thousands of years, making
hundreds of men work for it, serve it in order to transmit it further. 
Look how much potential energy there is in some small verse of Pushkin or 
Lermontoff. This energy affects not only men's feelings, but, by its very
existence, it affects their will. Look how the words, thoughts and feelings of 
the semi-mythical Homer go on living - refusing to die - and how much 
'motion' each of his words has produced in the course of its existence. 
It is quite clear that each thought of a poet contains enormous potential 
force, similar to the potential power contained in a chunk of coal or in a 
living cell, but infinitely more subtle, imponderable and potent. 
This remarkable correlation of phenomena may be expressed in the 
following formulation: the further a given phenomenon is removed from the 
visible and the tangible - from the physical - the further it is from matter, the 
more it contains of hidden force, the greater the number of phenomena it can 
produce and involve, the greater the amount of energy it can liberate, and the 
less it is dependent upon time. 
If we connect all the above with the principle of physics that the amount of 
energy is constant, we must specify more precisely that all the preceding 
statements referred not to the creation of new energy, but to the liberation of 
latent energy. Moreover, we have found that the liberating force of life and 
thought is infinitely greater than the liberating force of mechanical motion 
and chemical influences. A microscopic living cell is more powerful than a 
volcano - an idea is mightier than a geological cataclysm. 
Having established these distinctions between phenomena, let us try to 
find out what phenomena represent, taken by themselves, independently of 
our perception and feeling of them. 
We shall see at once that we know nothing about this. 
A phenomenon is known to the extent that it is an irritation, i.e. to the 
extent that it causes a sensation. 
Positivist philosophy sees at the root of all phenomena mechanical

[PAG 127]
motion or electro-magnetic energy. But the hypothesis of vibrating atoms or 
of units of energy - electrons - and of cycles of motion, different 
combinations of which create different 'phenomena' - all this is nothing but a 
hypothesis, based on a totally artificial and arbitrary assumption that the 
world exists in time and space. If we find that the conditions of time and 
space are only properties of our sense-perception, we absolutely abolish any
possibility of the hypothesis of 'energy' as the foundation of everything;
because energy requires time and space, i.e. it requires the conditions of time 
and space to be the properties of the world and not properties of 
consciousness. Thus, in reality, we know nothing about the causes of 
phenomena. We know that certain combinations of causes, acting on our con­
sciousness through the medium of the organism, produce a series of 
sensations which we are aware of as a green tree. But whether the 
representation of the tree corresponds to the real essence of the causes which 
have evoked these sensations, we do not know. 
The question of the relation of a phenomenon to the thing in itself, i.e. to 
the essence contained in it, has been, since very remote times, the main and 
most difficult problem of philosophy. Can we, by studying phenomena, reach 
their causes, the very essence of things? Kant said definitely: No, in studying
phenomena we do not even come nearer to the understanding of a thing in 
itself. And, recognizing the correctness of Kant's view, if we wish to come 
nearer to understanding things in themselves, we should seek an entirely new 
method, a way completely different from the one followed by positivist 
science which studies events or phenomena.