=== Tertium Organum (P. D. Ouspensky).pdf — CHUNK 5/18 ===
Chars: 45,000 | Offset: 178,522



[PAG 78]
world around us changed with these alterations, this would prove to us the 
dependence of the properties of space on the properties of our mind. 
For instance, if the above-mentioned higher form of inner life, which now 
appears only accidentally, as it were, depending on some little-known 
conditions, could be rendered as definite, as precise, as obedient to our will as 
a concept, and if, through this, the number of characteristics of space
increased, i.e. if space, instead of being three-dimensional, became four­
dimensional, this would confirm our supposition and prove Kant's idea that 
space with its properties is the form of our sense-perception. 
Or, if we could reduce the number of units of our mental life and 
deliberately deprive ourselves or some other man of concepts, leaving his or 
our mind to operate by representations and sensations alone; 
and if, through this, the number of characteristics of the space surrounding us 
diminished, i.e. if for that man the world were to become two-dimensional 
instead of three-dimensional and, with a further limitation of his mental 
apparatus, i.e. with depriving him of representations, it were to become one­
dimensional, this would confirm our surmise and Kant's thought could be 
regarded as proved. 
Thus, Kant's idea could be proved experimentally if we were able to 
ascertain that for a being possessing nothing but sensations the world is one­
dimensional; for a being possessing sensations and representations it is two­
dimensional; and for a being possessing, in addition to concepts and ideas, 
also higher forms of perception, the world is four-dimensional. 
To be more exact, Kant's proposition regarding the subjective character of 
the idea of space could be taken as proven, (a) if for a being possessing 
nothing but sensations, our entire world with all its variety of forms appeared 
as one line, if the universe of this being had one dimension, i.e. if this being
were one-dimensional by virtue of the properties of his perception; and (b) if
for a being possessing the capacity of forming representations in addition to 
his ability of experiencing sensations, the world had a two-dimensional 
extension, i.e. if our entire world with its blue skies, clouds, green trees, 
mountains and precipices, appeared to him merely as a plane; if the universe 
of this being had only two dimensions, that is, if this being were two­
dimensional by virtue of the properties of his perception. 
More briefly, Kant's proposition would be proved if we saw that for a given 
subject the number of characteristics of the world changed according to the 
change of his mental apparatus. 
It does not seem possible to carry out such an experiment of

[PAG 79]
reducing mental characteristics, for we do not know how to restrict our own 
or someone else's mental apparatus with the ordinary means at our disposal. 
Experiments of augmenting mental characteristics exist but, for many
different reasons, they are not sufficiently convincing. The main reason is 
that an increase of mental faculties produces in our inner world so much that 
is new, that this new masks any changes which take place simultaneously in 
our usual perceptions of the world. We feel the new but cannot exactly define 
the difference. 
A whole series of teachings and religious and philosophical doctrines have 
as their professed or hidden aim precisely this expansion of consciousness. 
This is the aim of mysticism of all times and all religions, the aim of 
occultism, the aim of the Eastern Yoga. But the question of the expansion of 
consciousness requires special study; 
the last chapters of this book are devoted to it. 
In the meantime, in order to prove the contention stated above about the 
change of the world as a result of a change in the mental apparatus, it is 
sufficient to examine the hypothesis about the possibility of a lesser number 
of mental characteristics. 
If we do not know how to carry out experiments in this direction, perhaps 
observation is possible. 
We must ask ourselves the question: Are there in the world beings whose 
mental life is below ours in the required sense? 
Such beings, whose mental life is below ours, undoubtedly exist. They are 
animals. 
We know very little about what constitutes the difference between the mental 
processes of an animal and the mental processes of a man; 
our ordinary 'conversational' psychology is altogether ignorant of it. As a rule 
we entirely deny the existence of reason in animals, or, on the contrary, we 
ascribe to them our own psychology, but 'limited' -though how and in what 
respect it is limited, we do not know. And then we say that an animal has no 
reason but has instinct. But we have a very hazy idea of what instinct may 
mean. I am speaking now not only of popular but also of 'scientific' 
psychology.
Let us, however, try to examine what instinct is and what animal mentality
is like. In the first place, let us examine the actions of an animal and 
determine in what way they differ from ours. If they are instinctive actions, 
what docs it mean? 
What actions are there in general and what is the difference between them? 
We distinguish in living beings reflex actions, instinctive actions, rational 
actions, automatic actions.

[PAG 80]
Reflex actions are simply responses by motion, reactions to external irritations, 
always occurring in the same manner, irrespective of their usefulness or uselessness, 
expediency or inexpediency in a given instance. Their origin and laws are the outcome 
of the simple irritability of the cell. 
What is meant by irritability of the cell and what are these laws? 
By irritability of the cell is meant its capacity to respond by motion to external 
irritations. Experiments with the simplest living one-cell organisms proved that 
irritability is governed by strictly definite laws. The cell responds by motion to an 
external irritation. The force of the responsive motion is increased with the increase of 
the force of irritation, but it has not been possible to establish the exact ratio. In order 
to provoke a responsive motion, the irritation must be sufficiently strong. Every 
irritation experienced leaves a certain trace in the cell, rendering it more susceptible to 
further irritations. This is proved by the fact that to a repeated irritation of an equal 
force the cell responds with a stronger movement than to the first irritation. And, if 
irritations are further repeated, the cell will respond to them with an increasingly 
stronger motion, up to a certain limit. Having reached this limit, the cell becomes tired, 
as it were, and begins to respond to the same irritation by increasingly weaker 
reactions. The cell appears to become used to the irritation. It becomes for the cell part 
of its permanent surroundings and the cell ceases to react to it, for it reacts only to 
changes in the permanent conditions. If from the very beginning the irritation is too 
weak to produce a responsive motion, it still leaves a certain invisible trace in the cell. 
This is shown by the fact that, by repeating weak irritations, it is possible to make the 
cell react to them. 
Thus in the laws of irritability we see what seem to be the rudiments of the 
capacities of memory, fatigue and habit. The cell produces the illusion of a being, 
which, if not conscious and reasoning, is at least capable of remembering, capable of 
forming habits and of getting tired. If we are almost deceived by a cell, how much 
easier it is for us to be deceived by an animal with its complex life. 
But let us return to our analysis of actions. By reflex actions of an organism are 
meant actions where the whole organism or its separate parts act as the cell does, i.e. 
within the limits of the law of irritability. We observe such actions both in man and in 
animals. A shudder runs through a man from sudden cold or from an unexpected touch. 
He blinks if some object quickly approaches or touches him. If a man sits with his leg 
hanging loosely, his foot jerks forward if the tendon immediately below the knee is hit. 
These movements happen in-

[PAG 81]
dependently of consciousness and may happen even contrary to consciousness. As a 
rule consciousness perceives them as an already accomplished fact. And these 
movements need not necessarily be expedient. The foot will jerk forward if the tendon 
is hit even if there is a knife or fire in front of it. 
By instinctive actions are meant actions which are expedient but performed without 
any consciousness of choice or consciousness of purpose. 
They arise with the appearance of an emotional quality in a sensation, i.e. from the 
moment when the feeling of pleasure or pain becomes connected with the sensation. 
And indeed, before the appearance of human intellect, 'actions' in all the animal 
kingdom are governed by the tendency to obtain or keep pleasure, or to avoid pain. 
We may say with the utmost certainty that instinct is pleasure-pain which, like the 
positive and negative poles of an electro-magnet, repels and attracts an animal in one or 
another direction, thus forcing it to perform a whole series of complicated actions, at 
times so expedient as to appear conscious; and not only conscious, but based on a 
foresight of the future almost bordering on clairvoyance, such as the migration of birds, 
the building of nests for the young still unborn, the finding of the way south in the 
autumn and north in the spring, and so on. 
But in actual fact all these actions are explained solely by instinct, i.e. by 
subordination to pleasure-pain. 
In the course of periods in which thousands of years may be counted as days, there 
was evolved in all animals, through selection, a type which lives according to this 
subordination. This subordination is expedient, i.e. its results lead to the required aim. 
It is quite clear why this is so. If the feeling of pleasure proceeded from something 
harmful, a given species could not live and would soon die out. Instinct is the guiding 
factor of its life; but only so long as instinct is expedient. As soon as it ceases to be 
expedient, it becomes the guiding factor of death, and the species very soon dies out. 
Normally, 'pleasure-pain' is pleasant and unpleasant not for the usefulness or the harm 
it brings, but as a consequence of it. Influences which had proved useful to a given 
species during its vegetable life begin to be experienced as pleasant with the transition 
to animal life; harmful influences are experienced as unpleasant. One and the same 
influence - say a certain temperature - may be useful and pleasant for one species and 
harmful and unpleasant for another. It is clear, therefore, that subordination to 
'pleasure-pain' should be expedient. The

[PAG 82]
pleasant is pleasant because it is useful; the unpleasant is unpleasant because 
it is harmful. 
The next stage after instinctive actions consists of rational and automatic 
actions. 
By rational action is meant an action known to the acting subject before it 
is performed — an action which the acting subject can name, define, explain 
and whose cause and purpose he can point out -before it has taken place. 
By automatic actions are meant actions which have been rational for a 
given subject but have since become customary and unconscious through 
frequent repetition. The automatic actions learned by trained animals were 
previously rational not in the animal but in the trainer. Such actions often 
seem quite rational, but this is pure illusion. The animal remembers the order 
of actions and so its actions appear to be thought out and expedient. And it is 
true they were thought out, but not by it. Automatic actions are often 
confused with instinctive actions; and indeed they do resemble the 
instinctive, but at the same time there is an enormous difference between 
them. Automatic actions are created by the subject in the course of his own 
life. And, before becoming automatic, they must for a long time remain 
rational for him or for another person. Instinctive actions are created during
the lifetime of a species and the capacity to perform them is handed down, in 
a ready-made form, through heredity. Automatic actions may be called the 
instinctive actions which a given subject has evolved for himself. Instinctive 
actions cannot be called automatic actions evolved by a given species, 
because they never were rational for separate individuals of that species, but 
are the result of a complex series of reflexes. 
Reflexes, instinctive actions and 'rational' actions may be regarded as 
reflected, i.e. as not independent. The first, the second and the third come not 
from man himself but from the external world. A man is merely a 
transmitting or transforming station of forces; all his actions belonging to 
these three categories are produced by impressions coming from the external 
world. In these three kinds of actions man is actually an automaton, either 
unaware or aware of his actions. Nothing comes from himself. 
Only the highest category of actions, i.e. conscious actions (which, 
generally speaking, we do not observe, since we confuse them with rational 
actions, mainly because we call 'rational' actions conscious) -only these 
actions depend not only on the impressions coming from the external world, 
but on something else besides. But the capacity for such actions is very rarely 
met with and only very few people have

[PAG 83]
it. These people may be defined as the HIGHER TYPE OF MAN. 
Having established the difference between actions, we must now return to 
the question: How does the mental apparatus of an animal differ from that of 
a man? Of the four categories of actions only the two lower ones are 
accessible to animals. The category of 'rational' actions is not accessible to 
them. This is proved, first of all, by the fact that animals do not speak as we 
do. 
It was shown earlier that the possession of speech is indissolubly 
connected with the possession of concepts. Consequently, we may say that 
animals do not possess concepts. 
Is this true, and is the possession of instinctive reason possible without 
possessing concepts? 
All that we know about instinctive reason tells us that it operates while 
possessing only representations and sensations, and on the lower levels 
possessing only sensations. The mental apparatus which thinks by means of 
representations must be identical with instinctive reason which enables it to 
make that selection from among the available representations which, from 
outside, produces the impression of reasoning and drawing conclusions. In 
reality, an animal does not think out its actions, but lives by emotions, 
obeying the emotion which is strongest at a given moment. Although it is true
that in the life of an animal there may be very acute moments, when it is 
faced with the necessity of making a selection from a certain series of 
representations. In that case, at a given moment, its actions may appear to be 
reasoned out. For instance, an animal, faced with danger, often acts with 
surprising caution and intelligence. But in reality the actions of an animal are 
governed not by thoughts but mostly by emotional memory and motor 
representations. It has been shown earlier that emotions are expedient and, in 
a normal being, obedience to them should also be expedient. In an animal, 
every representation, every remembered image is connected with some 
emotional sensation and emotional recollection; there are no unemotional 
cold thoughts or images in the nature of an animal. Or, if there are some, they
are inactive, incapable of moving it to any action. 
Thus, all the actions of animals, at times very complex, expedient and 
seemingly rational, can be explained without assuming the existence in them 
of concepts, reasoning and mental conclusions. On the contrary, we must 
admit that animals have no concepts. The proof of this is that they have no 
speech. 
If we take two men of different nationalities, different races, each ignorant 
of the language of the other, and settle them to live together, they will 
immediately find means of communicating with each other.

[PAG 84]
One would draw with his finger a circle, the other would draw another circle 
alongside the first. This is enough to establish that they can understand one 
another. If a thick stone wall were to separate people, again it would not deter 
them. One would knock three times; the other would also knock three times 
in reply - communication is established. The idea of communication with the 
inhabitants of another planet is based precisely on the system of light signals. 
On the earth it is proposed to make an enormous luminous circle or square. It 
should be noticed on Mars or somewhere over there and should be answered 
by a similar signal. With animals we live side by side, yet we are unable to 
establish such communication with them. Evidently, the distance between us 
is greater, the difference deeper than between people separated by ignorance 
of language, stone walls and enormous distances. 
Another proof of the absence of concepts in an animal is its incapacity of 
using a lever, i.e. its incapacity of arriving independently at an understanding
of the significance and the action of a lever. The usual argument that an 
animal does not know how to use a lever simply because its organs - paws, 
etc. - are not adapted for such actions, does not bear criticism, because any
animal can be taught to use a lever. This means that organs have nothing to 
do with it. The thing is simply that by itself an animal cannot arrive at the 
idea of a lever. 
The invention of a lever at once separated primitive man from the animals 
and it was inseparably connected with the appearance of concepts. The 
mental side of understanding the action of a lever lies in the construction of a 
correct syllogism. Without mentally constructing a syllogism it is impossible 
to understand the action of a lever. Without concepts it is impossible to 
construct a syllogism. In the mental sphere a syllogism is literally the same 
thing as a lever in the physical sphere. 
The application of a lever distinguishes man from the animal as drastically 
as does speech. If some Martian scientists were to look at the earth and study
it objectively through a telescope, not hearing speech from afar nor entering
into the subjective world of the inhabitants of the earth and without any 
contact with it, they would divide the beings living on the earth into two 
categories: those familiar with the action of a lever and those unfamiliar with 
it. 
On the whole the psychology of animals is very obscure to us. The infinite 
number of observations made of all animals, from elephants to spiders, and 
the infinite number of anecdotes about the intelligence, perspicacity and 
moral qualities of animals change nothing in

[PAG 85]
this respect. We represent animals either as living automatons or as stupid human 
beings. 
We are too shut up in the circle of our own mentality. We have no idea of any other 
mentality and involuntarily we think that the only kind of mentality possible is the one 
we possess. But this is an illusion which prevents us from understanding life. If we 
were able to enter into the inner world of an animal and understand how it perceives, 
understands and acts, we would see many extremely interesting things. For example, if 
we could represent to ourselves and re-create mentally the logic of the animal, it would 
greatly help us to understand our own logic and the laws of our thinking. Above all we 
would understand the conditional and relative character of our whole idea of the world. 
An animal must have a very peculiar logic. Of course, it would not be logic in the 
true sense of the word, for logic presupposes the existence of logos, i.e. word or 
concept. 
Our usual logic, the one we live by, without which 'the cobbler will not be able to 
make shoes' can be brought down to the simple scheme formulated by Aristotle in 
those writings which were published by his pupils under the general title of Organon, 
i.e. the 'Instrument' (of thought). This scheme consists in the following: 
A is A. 
A is not not-A.  
Everything is either A or not-A. 
The logic contained in this scheme - Aristotle's logic - is quite sufficient for 
observation. But for experiment it is insufficient, for experiment, takes place in time, 
whereas Aristotle's formulae do not take time into account. This was observed at the 
very dawn of the establishment of our experimental knowledge; it was noted by Roger 
Bacon and, some centuries later, was formulated by his famous namesake, Francis 
Bacon, in the treatise Novum Organum — 'New Instrument' (of thought). Briefly 
Bacon's formulation may be reduced to the following: 
That which was A, will be A.  
That which was not-A, will be not-A. 
Everything was and will be either A or not-A. 
All our scientific experience is built on these formulae, whether they are taken or 
not taken into account by our mind. And these same formulae actually serve as a basis 
for making shoes, for if a cobbler could not be sure that the leather bought yesterday 
would be leather

[PAG 86]
tomorrow, he would probably not venture to make shoes but would look for 
some other more secure profession. 
Logical formulae, both those of Aristotle and Bacon, are simply deduced 
from observation of facts and embrace nothing but the contents of these facts 
- and can embrace nothing more. They are not laws of thinking but merely
laws of the external world as it is perceived by us, or laws of our relationship
to the external world. 
If we were able to represent to ourselves the 'logic' of an animal, we would 
understand its relationship to the external world. Our chief mistake as regards 
the inner world of an animal lies in our ascribing to it our own logic. We 
think that there is only one logic, that our logic is something absolute, 
something existing outside us and apart from us. Yet, in actual fact, it is 
merely the laws of the relation of our inner life to the outside world or the 
laws which our mind finds in the outside world. A different mind will find 
different laws. 
The first difference between our logic and that of an animal is that the latter is 
not general. It is a particular logic in every case, for every separate 
representation. For animals there exists no classification according to 
common properties, i.e. classes, varieties and species. Every single object 
exists by itself, all its properties are specific properties.
This house and that house are for an animal totally different objects,
because the one is his house and the other an alien house. Generally speaking, 
we recognize objects by their similarity; an animal must recognize them by
their differences. It remembers every object by the signs which have had for it 
the greatest emotional significance. In this form, i.e. with emotional qualities, 
representations are preserved in the memory of an animal. It is easy to see 
that it is much more difficult to preserve such representations in memory; 
consequently the memory of an animal is much more burdened than ours, 
although in the amount of knowledge and the number of things preserved in 
the memory an animal is far below us. 
Having once seen an object, we refer it to a certain class, variety and 
species, attach it to one or another concept and connect it in our mind with 
one or another 'word', i.e. with an algebraic sign, then with another, defining
it, and so on. 
An animal has no concepts, it has no mental algebra with the help of which 
we think. It must know a given object and remember it with all its 
characteristics and peculiarities. Not a single forgotten characteristic will 
come back. But for us the main characteristics are implied in the concept with 
which we have connected the given object, and we

[PAG 87]
can find it in our memory by any of its characteristic signs. 
It is clear from this that an animal's memory is more burdened than ours and that this 
is precisely the main cause which hinders the mental evolution of an animal. Its mind is 
too occupied. It has no time to move forward. It is possible to arrest the mental 
development of a child by making it learn by heart series of words and series of figures. 
An animal is exactly in the same position. And this explains the strange fact that an 
animal is more intelligent when young. 
In a man the peak of his intellectual power is reached at a mature age, very often 
even in old age; in the case of an animal it is just the reverse. It is receptive only while 
it is young. With maturity its development becomes arrested and in old age it 
undoubtedly becomes retrogressive. 
The logic of an animal, if we attempt to express it in formulae similar to those of 
Aristotle and Bacon, would be as follows. 
The animal will understand the formula A is A. It will say: I am I, and so on. But it 
will not understand the formula A is not not-A, for not-A is a concept. The animal will 
say: 
This is this. That is that. 
This is not that. 
or 
This man is this man. That man is 
that man. This man is not that man. 
Later on I shall have to return to the logic of animals. For the moment it was only 
necessary to establish the fact that the psychology of animals is very distinctive and 
fundamentally different from ours. And it is not only distinctive but also very varied. 
Among the animals known to us, even among domestic animals, psychological 
differences are so great as to put them on totally different levels. We do not notice this 
and put them all under one head - 'animals'. 
A goose has put its foot on a piece of watermelon rind, pulls at it with its beak but 
cannot pull it out, and it never occurs to it to lift its foot off the rind. This means that its 
mental processes are so vague that it has a very imperfect knowledge of its own body 
and does not properly distinguish it from other objects. This could not happen either 
with a dog or a cat. They know their bodies perfectly well. But in their relations to 
outside objects a dog and a cat are very different.

[PAG 88]
I have observed a dog, a 'very intelligent' setter. When the little rug on which he 
slept got rucked up and became uncomfortable to lie on, he understood that the 
discomfort was outside him, that it was in the rug and, more precisely, in the position 
of the rug. So he kept on worrying the rug with his teeth, twisting it and dragging it 
here and there, all the while growling, sighing and groaning until someone came to his 
assistance. But he could never manage to straighten out the rug by himself. 
With a cat such a question could never even arise. A cat knows its body perfectly 
well, but everything outside itself it takes for granted, as something given. To correct 
the outside world, to accommodate it to its own comfort, would never occur to a cat. 
Maybe this is so because a cat lives more in another world, the world of dreams and 
fantasies, than in this one. Therefore, if there were something wrong with its bed, a cat 
would itself turn and twist a hundred times until it could settle down comfortably; or it 
would go and settle down in another place. 
A monkey would of course spread out the rug quite easily. 
Here are four beings, all quite different. And this is only one example of which one 
could easily find hundreds. And yet for us all this is an animal. We mix together many 
things that are totally different; our divisions are very often wrong and this hinders us 
in our examination of ourselves. 
Moreover it would be quite incorrect to assert that the differences mentioned 
determine 'evolutionary stages', that animals of one type are higher or lower than 
others. The dog and the monkey by their reason, their ability to imitate and (the dog) 
by his fidelity to man seem to be higher than the cat, but the cat is infinitely superior to 
them in its intuition, its aesthetic sense, its independence and willpower. The dog and 
the monkey manifest themselves in their entirety. All that there is in them can be seen. 
But it is not without cause that the cat is regarded as a magical and occult animal. 
There is much in it that is hidden, much that it does not itself know. If one is to speak 
in terms of evolution it would be much more correct to say that these are animals of 
different evolutions, just as, in all probability, not one but several evolutions go on in 
mankind. 
The recognition of several independent and, from a certain point of view, equivalent 
evolutions, developing entirely different properties, would lead us out of the labyrinth 
of endless contradictions in our understanding of man and would show the way to the 
understanding of the only real and important evolution for us, the evolution towards 
superman.

[PAG 89]
CHAPTER 9  
Perception of the world by man and by animals. Illusions of animals and their lack of 
control over perceptions. A world of moving planes. Angles and curves as motion. 
Third dimension as motion. The two-dimensional appearance, for animals, of our 
three-dimensional world. Animals as real two-dimensional beings. Lower animals as 
one-dimensional beings. Time and space of a snail. Time-sense as a nebulous space­
sense. Time and space of a dog. Change of the world with a change of the mental 
apparatus. Proof of Kant's problem. Three-dimensional world as an illusory 
representation. 
We have established the tremendous difference which exists between the mentality of 
man and that of animals. This difference is bound to have a deep effect on the animal 
perception of the external world. But how and in what? This is precisely what we do 
not know and what we must endeavour to establish. 
To do this we must return once more to our perception of the world and examine in 
detail how we perceive it; and then we must see how the world must be perceived by 
the animal with its limited mental equipment. 
First of all we must take note of the fact that, as regards the external aspect and form 
of the world, our perception is extremely incorrect. We know that the world consists of 
solids, but we always see and touch only surfaces. We never see or touch a solid. A 
solid is already a concept, made up of a number of representations put together by 
means of reasoning and experience. For direct sensation only surfaces exist. Sensations 
of weight, mass, volume, which we mentally associate with a 'solid', are in reality 
connected for us with sensations of surfaces. We only know that this sensation of 
surfaces comes from a solid, but we never sense the solid itself. Maybe it is possible to 
call the composite sensation of surfaces, weight, mass, density, resistance and so on ­
'sensation of a solid'. But we are obliged mentally to bind all these sensations into one 
and to call this general sensation - a solid. We sense directly only surfaces, and then, 
separately, weight; 
we never sense the resistance of a solid, as such. 
But we know that the world does not consist of surfaces, we know that we see the 
world incorrectly. We know that we never see the

[PAG 90]
world as it really is, not only in the philosophical sense of this expression, but 
even in the most ordinary geometrical sense. We have never seen a cube, a 
sphere, etc., we have always seen only surfaces. Realizing this, we mentally 
correct what we see. Behind the surfaces we think the solid. But we can never 
represent a solid to ourselves; we cannot represent a cube or a sphere not in 
perspective, but from all sides at once. 
It is clear that the world does not exist in perspective; yet we are unable to 
see it in any other way. We see everything only in perspective, i.e. in 
perceiving it, we distort the world with our eye. And we know that we distort 
it. We know that it is not as we see it. And mentally we continually correct 
what the eye sees, substituting the real content for those symbols of things 
which our sight shows us. 
Our sight is a complex faculty. It consists of visual sensations, plus the 
memory of sensations of touch. A child tries to touch everything he sees - the 
nose of his nurse, the moon, the dancing spot of reflected sunlight on the 
wall. He learns only gradually to distinguish between the near and the far by
sight alone. But we know that even in mature years we are easily subject to 
optical illusions. 
We see distant objects as flat, i.e. even more incorrectly, for relief is, after 
all, a symbol indicating a certain property of objects. At a great distance a 
man is outlined for us in silhouette. This happens because at long range we 
can never touch anything, and our eye has not been trained to notice the 
differences in surfaces which, at close range, are felt by the fingertips.*
We are never able to see even a small bit of the external world as it is, i.e. 
such as we know it to be. We can never see a writing desk or a cupboard 
simultaneously from all sides, as well as inside. Our eye distorts the external 
world in a certain way to enable us, in looking about, to determine the 
position of objects relatively to ourselves. But 
* In this connection, observations made on the blind beginning to see are very 
interesting. 
The periodical Slepetz ('The Blind Man') 1912, contains a description, based on 
direct observation, of how men, blind from birth, learn to see after an operation which 
has restored their sight. 
This is how a youth of seventeen describes his experiences after the restoration of his 
sight by the removal of a cataract. On the third day after the operation he was asked 
what he saw; he replied that he saw a vast expanse of light with dim objects moving in 
it. He did not distinguish these objects. Only after four days did he begin to distinguish 
them, and only after two weeks, when his eyes became used to the light, did he begin to 
make a practical use of his sight for the discernment of objects. He was shown all the 
colours of the spectrum and very quickly mastered them, except the yellow and the 
green which he kept on confusing for a long time. A cube, a sphere and a pyramid, 
placed before him, seemed to him a square, a flat disc and a triangle. When a flat disc 
was placed next

[PAG 91]
to look at the world not from our own point of view is impossible for us. And 
we are never able to have a correct view of it, a view not distorted by our 
eyesight. 
Relief and perspective - these are the distortions of the objects by our eye.
They are an optical illusion, a visual deception. A cube in perspective is only 
a conventional symbol of a three-dimensional cube. And everything we see is 
only a conventional image of that conventionally real three-dimensional 
world which our geometry studies - and not the real world itself. On the basis 
of what we see, we must guess what it really is. We know that what we see is 
incorrect, and we think of the world as being different from the way we see it. 
If we had no doubts about the correctness of our sight, if we knew that the 
world was such as we saw it, it stands to reason that we would think of it as 
we see it. In practice, however, we are constantly introducing corrections into 
what we see. 
This capacity of introducing corrections in that which the eye sees 
necessarily implies the possession of concepts, for corrections are made by 
means of reasoning, which is impossible without concepts. Without this 
capacity of correcting what is seen by the eye we would see the world quite 
differently, i.e. much of what actually exists we would see wrongly, much of 
what actually exists we would not see at all, and we would see a great deal of 
what, in reality, does not exist at all. In the first place, we would see an 
enormous number of nonexistent movements. For direct sensation, every 
movement of our own is connected with the movement of everything around 
us. We know that this movement is illusory, but we see it as real. Objects turn 
round before us, run past us, outstrip one another. Houses, past which we 
drive slowly, turn about leisurely; if we drive fast, they turn quickly; trees 
suddenly spring up before us, run away and vanish. 
This apparent animation of objects, together with dreams, provided, and 
still provides, the main food for the fantasy of fairy-tales. 
to the sphere, he could not see any difference between them. When asked to describe 
his first impression of the two figures, he answered that he noticed at once the 
difference between the cube and the sphere and realized that they were not drawings, 
but could not derive from them the representation of a square and a circle, until he felt 
in his fingertips the same sensation as though he had touched a square and a circle. 
When he was allowed to handle the cube, the sphere and the pyramid, he immediately 
identified these solids by touch and was very surprised at not having recognized them at 
once by sight. He had as yet no representation of space, of perspective. All objects 
appeared flat to him. Although he knew that the nose projected and the eyes were sunk 
in cavities, the human face also looked flat to his eyes. He was overjoyed at having his 
sight restored, but in the beginning looking at things tired him; impressions 
overwhelmed and exhausted him. This is why, while enjoying perfect sight, he at times 
reverted to touch, as a form of relaxation.

[PAG 92]
In those cases the 'movements' of objects may be very complex. Look at 
the strange behaviour of a cornfield seen through the window of your railway
carriage. It runs up to your very window, stops, turns about slowly and runs to 
one side. The trees in the wood clearly run at different speeds, outstripping 
one another. A whole landscape of illusory motion! And what of the sun 
which still continues, in all languages, to rise and set, and the movement of 
which was at one time so passionately defended! 
This is how it all appears to us. And although we already know that all 
these movements are illusory, we still see them and are, at times, deceived. 
How many more illusions we would see if we were unable mentally to 
unravel the causes which produce them, and were to regard everything as 
existing exactly as we see it? 
I see it, therefore it is. 
This assertion is the main source of all illusions. The right way to put it 
would be: I see it, therefore it is not! Or at any rate: I see it, therefore it is not 
so! 
We can say the latter, but animals cannot. For them whatever they see - is. 
They have to believe what they see. 
How does the world appear to animals? 
For animals the world is a series of complex moving surfaces. Animals live 
in a two-dimensional world; their universe has the appearance and properties 
of a surface. And on this surface there take place a vast number of movements 
of the most varied and fantastic character. 
Why should the world appear as a surface to animals? 
First of all, because it appears as a surface to us. 
But we know that the world is not a surface, whereas animals cannot know 
it. They accept everything as it appears. They cannot correct what the eye 
sees, or cannot do so to the same degree as we can. 
We can measure in three directions; the quality of our mind enables us to 
do so. Animals can measure simultaneously only in two directions; they can 
never measure in three directions at once. This is due to the fact that, having 
no concepts, they are incapable of keeping in mind the measurements of the 
first direction while measuring the second and third. 
I will explain this more clearly. 
Let us imagine ourselves measuring a cube. In measuring a cube in three 
directions, we must, while measuring in one direction, keep in mind, 
remember, the two others. But things can only be kept in mind as concepts, 
i.e. we can remember them only by connecting them with various concepts, 
by labelling them in one or another way.

[PAG 93]
Thus, having labelled the first two directions - length and breadth, it is 
possible to measure the height. Otherwise it could not be done. As 
representations the first two measurements of a cube are absolutely identical 
and are bound to merge in our mind into one. An animal has no concepts, so 
it cannot label the first two measurements of the cube as length and breadth. 
Therefore, at the moment when it begins to measure the height of the cube, 
the first two measurements will merge into one. An animal measuring a cube 
and possessing no concepts but only representations, will resemble a cat I 
once observed. She dragged her kittens - there were five or six of them - into 
different rooms and could not collect them together again. She would get 
hold of one, carry it over to another and put them side by side. Then she 
would start looking for the third, bring it along and place it with the other 
two. Then immediately she would seize the first, carry it to another room and 
put it there beside the fourth; then she would again run to the first room, 
catch hold of the second and drag it somewhere else to the fifth, and so on. 
For a whole hour the cat struggled with her kittens, genuinely harassed, but 
could do nothing. Clearly she had no concepts to help her remember how 
many kittens there were in all. 
It is extremely important to explain to oneself an animal's relationship to 
the measurement of solids. 
The whole point is that animals see nothing but surfaces. (This we can say
with the utmost conviction, since we ourselves see nothing but surfaces.)
Seeing only surfaces, animals can represent to themselves only two 
dimensions. The third dimension, side by side with the first two, can only be
thought, i.e. this dimension must be a concept. But animals have no concepts; 
the third dimension appears also as a representation. Consequently, at the 
moment of its appearance, the first two representations invariably merge into 
one. Animals see the difference between two dimensions, but cannot see the 
difference between three. This difference can only be known. And in order to 
know that, concepts are necessary. 
For animals identical representations are bound to merge into one, just as 
for us two simultaneous, identical phenomena taking place at one point must 
merge into one. For animals it would be one phenomenon, just as for us all 
identical, simultaneous phenomena taking place at one point are one 
phenomenon. 
Thus animals will see the world as a surface, and will measure this surface 
only in two directions. 
How then to explain the fact that, living in a two-dimensional world, or 
seeing themselves in a two-dimensional world, animals

[PAG 94]
orientate perfectly well in our three-dimensional world? How to explain that 
a bird flies up and down, straight ahead and sideways, in all three directions; 
that a horse jumps fences and ditches; that a dog and a cat seem to understand 
the properties of depth and height together with length and breadth? 
In order to explain this we must return once more to the fundamental 
principles of animal psychology. It has been pointed out earlier that many 
properties of objects which we remember as the general properties of species 
and varieties, have to be remembered by animals as the individual properties 
of objects. In sorting out this enormous store of individual properties 
preserved in memory animals are helped by the emotional quality connected 
for them with each representation and each memory of a sensation. 
An animal knows, say, two roads as two entirely separate phenomena 
having nothing in common; one phenomenon, i.e. one road consists of a 
series of definite representations coloured by definite emotional qualities; the 
other phenomenon, i.e. the other road, consists of a series of other definite 
representations, coloured by other qualities. We say that both the one and the 
other are roads, one leading to one place, the other to another. For the animal 
the two roads have nothing in common. But it remembers all the sequence of 
emotional qualities connected with the first road and the second road and so 
remembers both roads with their turnings, ditches, fences and so on. 
Thus the memory of the definite properties of objects which they have seen 
helps animals to orientate in the world of phenomena. But, as a rule, when 
faced with new phenomena, animals are much more helpless than man. 
Animals see two dimensions. They constantly sense the third dimension 
but do not see it. They sense it as something transient, as we sense time. 
The surfaces which animals see possess for them many strange properties; 
these are, first of all numerous and varied movements. 
It has been said already that all illusory movements must be perfectly real 
for them. These movements seem real to us also, but we know them to be 
illusory, as for instance the turning round of a house as we drive past, the 
springing up of a tree from round the corner, the