=== Tertium Organum (P. D. Ouspensky).pdf — CHUNK 15/18 ===
Chars: 45,000 | Offset: 619,659



[PAG 249]
great. The sun too which is there is all the stars: and again each star is the sun and 
all the stars. In each, however, a different property predominates, but at the same 
time all things are visible in each. Motion likewise there is pure; for the motion is not 
confounded by the mover different from it. Permanency also suffers no change of its 
nature, because it is not mingled with the unstable. And the beautiful there is 
beautiful, because it does not subsist in beauty (as in a subject). Each thing too is 
there established, not as in a foreign land, but the seat of each thing is that which each 
thing is. ... Nor is the thing itself different from the place in which it subsists. For the 
subject of it is intellect, and it is itself intellect. . . . But there each part always 
proceeds from the whole, and is at the same time each part and the whole. For it 
appears indeed as a party; but by him whose sight is acute, it will be seen as a whole. 
. . . There is likewise no weariness of the vision which is there, nor any plenitude of 
perception which can bring intuition to an end. For neither was there any vacuity, 
which when filled might cause the visive energy to cease; nor is this one thing, but 
that another, so as to occasion a part of one thing not to be amicable with that of 
another. 
And that [the knowledge] which is there insatiable is so, because its plenitude 
never causes it to despise that by which it is filled. For by seeing it more abundantly 
sees, and perceiving both itself and the objects of its perception to be infinite, it 
follows its own nature [in unceasing contemplation]. . . . And the life there is wisdom; 
a wisdom not obtained by a reasoning process, because the whole of it always was, 
and is not in any respect deficient, so as to be in want of investigation. But it is the 
first wisdom, and is not derived from another.* 
Surprisingly akin to Plotinus is Jacob Boehme, who was an ordinary shoemaker in 
the German town of Goerlitz at the end of the sixteenth and the beginning of the 
seventeenth century, and who left a whole series of remarkable writings in which he 
described the knowledge that came to him in moments of illumination. 
His first 'illumination' occurred in 1600 when he was twenty-five.** 
Sitting one day in his room his eye fell upon a burnished pewter dish, which reflected 
the sunshine with such marvellous splendour that he fell into an inward ecstasy, and it 
seemed to him as if he could now look into the principles and deepest foundation of 
things. He believed that it was only a fancy, and in order to banish it from his mind he 
went out upon the green. But here he remarked that he gazed into the very heart of 
things, the very herbs and grass, and that actual nature harmonized with what he had 
inwardly seen. He said nothing of this to anyone, but praised and thanked God in 
silence. . . . 
Of this first illumination Hartmann [Boehme's biographer] says that by it or from 
it: 'He learned to know the innermost foundation of nature, and acquired the capacity 
to see henceforth with the eyes of the soul into 
* Select Works of Plotinus, trs. Thomas Taylor, ed. G. R. S. Mead, London, G. 
Bell & Sons, 1929. 
** The ensuing quotation is from Dr R. M. Bucke's book Cosmic Consciousness, 
Philadelphia, Innes & Sons, 1905, reprinted New York, Dutton, 1969.

[PAG 250]
the heart of all things, a faculty which remained with him even in his normal 
condition. . . . 
'About the year 1600 ... he was again surrounded by the divine light and 
replenished with the heavenly knowledge; inasmuch as going abroad in the fields to 
a green before Neys Gate, at Görlitz, he there sat down and, viewing the herbs and 
grass of the field in his inward light, he saw into their essences, use and properties, 
which were discovered to him by their lineaments, figures and signatures. In like 
manner he beheld the whole creation, and from that foundation of revelation he 
afterwards wrote his book, De Signatura Rerum. In the unfolding of those mysteries 
before his understanding he had a great measure of joy, yet returned home and took 
care of his family and lived in great peace and silence, scarce intimating to any these 
wonderful things that had befallen him, till in the year 1610, being again taken into 
the light, lest the mysteries revealed to him should pass through him as a stream, and 
rather for a memorial than intending any publication, he wrote his first book, called 
Aurora, or the Morning Redness. 
'The first illumination, in 1600, was not complete. . . . Ten years later (1610) he 
had another remarkable inward experience. What he had previously seen only 
chaotically, fragmentarily, and in isolated glimpses, he now beheld as a coherent 
whole and in more definite outlines. . . . 
'[When] his third illumination took place . . . that which in former visions had 
appeared to him chaotic and multifarious was now recognized by him as unity, like a 
harp of many strings, of which each string is a separate instrument, while the whole 
is only one harp* He now recognized the divine order of nature, and how from the 
trunk of the tree of life sprung different branches, bearing manifold leaves and 
flowers and fruits, and he became impressed with the necessity of writing down 
what he saw and preserving the record.' . . . 
He himself speaks of this final and complete illumination as follows: 
'The gate was opened to me that in one quarter of an hour I saw and knew more 
than if I had been many years together at a university, at which I exceedingly 
admired and thereupon turned my praise to God for it. For I saw and knew the being 
of all beings, the byss and abyss and the eternal generation of the Holy Trinity, the 
descent and original of the world and of all creatures through divine wisdom. . . . 
And I saw and knew the whole working essence, in the evil and the good and the 
original and the existence of each of them; and likewise how the fruitful-bearing­
womb of eternity brought forth. So that I did not only greatly wonder at it but did 
also exceedingly rejoice.' 
Describing his 'illuminations', Boehme says in one of his writings: 
Suddenly . . . my spirit did break through . . . even to the innermost birth of Geniture 
of the Deity, and there I was embraced with love, as a bridegroom embraces his 
dearly beloved bride. But the greatness of the triumphing that was in the spirit I 
cannot express either in speaking or writing; neither can it be compared to anything, 
but with that wherein the life is generated in the midst of death, and it is like the 
resurrection from 
* See quotation from van Manen's Book, Chapter 11, pp. 107-9.

[PAG 251]
the dead. In this light my spirit suddenly saw through all, and in and by all the 
creatures, even in herbs and grass, it knew God, who he is, and how he is, and what 
his will is; and suddenly in that light my will was set on, by a mighty impulse, to 
describe the being of God. But because I could not presently apprehend the deepest 
births of God in their being and comprehend them in my reason, there passed almost 
twelve years before the exact understanding thereof was given me. And it was with 
me as with a young tree which is planted in the ground, and at first is young and 
tender, and flourishing to the eye, especially if it comes on lustily in its growing. But 
it does not bear fruit presently; and though it blossoms, they fall off; 
also many a cold wind, frost and snow, puff upon it, before it comes to any growth 
and bearing of fruit. 
Boehme's books are full of wonder at the mysteries which were revealed to him. 
* I was as simple concerning the hidden mysteries [he writes], as the meanest of all; 
but my virgin of the wonders of God taught me, so that I must write of his wonders; 
though indeed my purpose is to write this for a memorandum for myself. . . . 
Not I, the I that I am [he says], know those things: but God knows them in 
me. 
If you will behold your own self and the outer world, and what is taking place 
therein, you will find that you, with regard to your external being, are that external 
world. 
His 'Dialogues between a Disciple and his Master' are remarkable. (By Disciple and 
Master should be understood the lower and higher consciousness in man.) 
The Disciple said to his Master: Sir, how may I come to the Supersensual Life, so that 
I may see God, and may hear God speak? 
The Master answered and said: Son, when thou canst throw thyself into THAT, 
where no Creature dwelleth, though it be but for a moment, then thou hearest what 
God speaketh. 
Disciple. Is that where no Creature dwelleth near at hand, or is it afar off? 
Master. It is in thee. And if thou canst, my Son, for a while but cease from all thy 
thinking and willing, then thou shall hear the unspeakable words of God. 
Disciple. How can I hear him speak, when I stand still from thinking and willing? 
Master. When thou standest still from the thinking of Self, and the willing of Self. 
When both thy intellect and will are quiet, and passive to the expressions of the 
Eternal Word and Spirit; and when thy soul is winged up and above that which is 
temporal, the outward senses and the imagination being locked up by holy 
abstraction, then the Eternal Hearing, Seeing and Speaking will be revealed in thee, 
and so God heareth and seeth through thee, being now the organ of his Spirit, and so 
God speaketh in thee, and whispereth to thy spirit, and thy spirit heareth his voice.

[PAG 252]
Blessed art thou therefore if thou canst stand still from self-thinking and self-willing, 
and canst stop the wheel of thy imagination and senses. . . . Since it is nought indeed 
but thine own hearing and willing that do hinder thee, so that thou dost not see and 
hear God. . . . 
Disciple. 0 Loving Master ... I can no longer endure that any Thing should divert me; 
. . . how shall I find the nearest way to it? 
Master. Where the way is hardest, there walk thou, and what the world casteth 
away, that take thou up; and what the world doth, that do thou not. But in all things 
walk thou contrary to the world. So thou comest the nearest way to that which thou 
art seeking. . . . 
Disciple. 0 how may I arrive at the Unity of Will, and how come into the Unity of 
Vision? 
Master. Mark now what I say. The Right Eye looketh forward in thee into Eternity. 
The Left Eye looketh backwards in thee into Time. If thou now sufferest thyself to be 
always looking into Nature, and the Things of Time, it will be impossible for thee 
ever to arrive at the Unity, which thou wishest for. Remember this, and be upon thy 
watch. Give not thy mind leave to enter into nor to fill itself with that which is 
without thee; neither look thou backwards upon thyself. . . . Let not thy Left Eye 
deceive thee by making continually one representation after another, and stirring up 
thereby an earnest longing in the self-propriety; but let thy right eye command this 
left. . . . But never shall thou arrive at the Unity of Vision or Uniformity of Will, but 
by ... bringing the Eye of Time into the Eye of Eternity, and then descending by 
means of these united through the Light of God into the Light of Nature. 
The third dialogue is between Junius, a scholar, and Theophorus, his master, 
concerning heaven and hell. 
The Scholar asked his Master: Whither goeth the Soul when the Body 
Dieth? 
His Master answered him: There is no necessity for it to go any whither. How not, 
said the inquisitive Junius, must not the Soul leave the body at 
death and go either to Heaven or Hell? 
It needs no going forth, replied the venerable Theophorus. . . . The Soul 
hath Heaven and Hell within itself before, according as it is written. . . . 
And whichsoever of the two, either Heaven or Hell, is manifested in it, in 
that the soul standeth.* 
The extracts quoted here are sufficient to indicate the character of the writings of an 
uneducated shoemaker from a small provincial town in Germany of the sixteenth to 
seventeenth century. Boehme is remarkable for the pronounced intellectuality of his 
'comprehensions', although the moral element in them is also very strong. 
* Jacob Behmen, Dialogues on the Supersensual Life, London, Methuen, 1901.

[PAG 253]
In the book already mentioned (The Varieties of Religious Experience) Professor 
William James dwells with great attention on Christian mysticism, which contributed a 
great deal to the establishment of the cognitive side of mysticism. 
I borrow from him the description of mystical experiences of certain Christian 
saints. 
Saint Ignatius confessed one day to Father Laynez that a single hour of meditation at 
Manfesa had taught him more truth about heavenly things than all the teachings of all 
the doctors put together could have taught him. . . . One day in orizon, on the steps of 
the choir of the Dominican church, he saw in a distinct manner the plan of divine 
wisdom in the creation of the world. On another occasion, during a procession, his 
spirit was ravished in God, and it was given him to contemplate, in a form and images 
fitted to the weak understanding of a dweller on the earth, the deep mystery of the holy 
Trinity. This last vision flooded his heart with such sweetness, that the mere memory 
of it in after times made him shed abundant tears. 
Similarly with Saint Teresa. 'One day, being in orison,' she writes, 'it was granted me 
to perceive in one instant how all things are seen and contained in God. I did not 
perceive them in their proper form, and nevertheless the view I had of them was of a 
sovereign clearness, and has remained vividly impressed upon my soul. It is one of the 
most signal of all the graces which the Lord has granted me. . . . The view was so 
subtle and delicate that the understanding cannot grasp it.' 
She goes on to tell how it was as if the Deity were an enormous and sovereignly 
limpid diamond, in which all our actions were contained in such a way that their full 
sinfulness appeared evident as never before. 
On another day she relates, 'Our Lord made me comprehend in what way it is that 
one God can be in three Persons. He made me see it so clearly that I remained as 
extremely surprised as I was comforted . . . and now when I think of the holy Trinity, 
or hear it spoken of, I understand how the three . . . Persons form only one God and I 
experience an unspeakable happiness.' 
Professor James points out that Christian mysticism is very close to the 'Upanishads' 
and the 'Vedanta'. 
The fountain head of Christian mysticism is Dionysius the Areopagite. He describes 
the absolute truth by negatives exclusively. 
The cause of all things is neither soul nor intellect; nor has it imagination, opinion, 
or reason, or intelligence; nor is it reason or intelligence; nor is it spoken or thought. 
It is neither number, nor order, nor magnitude, nor littleness, nor equality, nor 
inequality, nor similarity, nor dissimilarity. It neither stands, nor moves, nor rests. ... 
It is neither essence, nor eternity, nor time. Even intellectual contact docs not belong 
to it. It is neither science nor truth. It is not even royalty or wisdom; not

[PAG 254]
one; not unity; not divinity or goodness; nor even spirit as we know it. . . .'* 
The writings of mystics of the Orthodox Church are collected in the books, called 
Philokalia, comprising five large volumes, difficult to read. I have taken a few 
examples of deep and subtle mysticism from the book Superconsciousness and Ways 
to its Attainment by M. V. Lodizhensky who studied Philokalia and found there 
remarkable examples of philosophical thought. 
Imagine a circle [says Avva Dorotheus - seventh century], in the middle, its centre, 
and radii, or rays, going out of this centre. The further these radii travel from the 
centre, the more divergent and distant they become from one another; and the other 
way round, the closer they are to the centre, the nearer they approach one another. 
Imagine now that this circle is the world, the very middle of it. God, and the straight 
lines (radii) going out from the centre towards the circumference, or going from the 
circumference towards the centre are the paths of men's lives. And here also, the 
further the saints penetrate inside the circle towards the middle of it, desiring to 
approach God, the closer, according to the depth of this penetration, they come to 
God and to each other. . . . Understand similarly about going out from the centre. -
The more they withdraw from God . . . the more, in the same measure, they withdraw 
from one another, and as much as they withdraw from one another, so much they 
withdraw from God. Such also is the property of love: to the extent that we are 
withdrawn and do not love God, each of us is also far from his neighbour. But if we 
love God, then to the extent that we approach to God in our love of Him, we become 
united in love with our neighbours; and as much as we are united with out 
neighbours, so much we become united with God also (Super-consciousness, p. 266; 
Philokalia, vol. II, p. 6l7).** 
Hear now [says St Isaac of Syria (sixth century)] how a man becomes finer, acquires 
that which is of the spirit and in his life becomes akin to the invisible powers. . . . 
When vision has soared above earthly things and the 
* William James, The Varieties of Religious Experience, London, Longmans 
Green, 1917. 
** The author of Superconsciousness, M. V. Lodizhensky, told me that in the 
summer of 1910 he was in Yassnaya Poliana on a visit to L. N. Tolstoy, and had a talk 
with him about mystics and the Philokalia. At first Tolstoy took a very sceptical 
attitude to mysticism, but when M. V. Lodizhensky read to him the quotation, given 
here, from Avva Dorotheus, about the circle, Tolstoy became very enthusiastic, ran 
into another room and brought out a letter in which a triangle was drawn. It transpired 
that he had independently almost grasped the thought of Avva Dorotheus and was 
writing to someone that God was the apex of the triangle and men were points at the 
angles; 
coming closer to one another, they come nearer to God, and coming nearer to God they 
come closer to one another. A few days later Tolstoy rode over to Lodizhensky, who 
lived near Tula, and read different parts of Philokalia there, regretting very much that 
he had not known these books before. (P.D.O.)

[PAG 255]
cares of earthly doings, when it begins to test its thoughts in that which is within, 
hidden from the eyes, when it reaches out on high, and is led by faith in its care for 
the life to come, its longing for that which has been promised us, and its search for 
hidden mysteries, - then faith itself consumes this knowledge and becomes 
transformed. Thus the knowledge is born again, becoming entirely of the spirit. Then 
it can soar on wings into the regions of the incorporeal spirits, may touch the depths 
of the intangible sea, representing in the mind the marvellous acts of Divine rule in 
the natures of thinking and feeling beings; and can seek out spiritual mysteries which 
may be comprehended by a simple and subtle mind. Then the inner senses wake up to 
spiritual doing, after the manner that they will be in the immortal and imperishable 
life; because, even in this world, it has undergone, as it were in secret, a mental 
resurrection, in true token of the general resurrection (Superconsciousness, p. 370; 
Philokalia, vol. II, p. 658). 
When the grace of the Holy Spirit [says Maxim Kapsokalivit], descends on anyone, it 
shows him nothing of the ordinary things of this sensual world, but makes him see 
things he never saw or imagined. Then the mind of such a man learns from the Holy 
Spirit the high and hidden mysteries which, according to the divine Paul, neither the 
human eye can understand, nor the human reason comprehend unaided (I Corinthians 
2: 9). And so that you may understand how our mind sees them, ponder over what I 
shall say to you. Wax, when it is far from the fire, is hard, and it is possible to handle 
it and hold it. But as soon as it is thrown into the fire, it immediately melts, and so 
becomes alight in the fire and burns. Thus everything becomes light, and everything 
ends in the midst of flames. So also is the human mind: when it stands by itself, 
unconnected with God, it comprehends everything around it in the usual way, 
according to its powers. But when it comes close to the Divine fire and to the Holy 
spirit, it is wholly enveloped by this Divine fire, and becomes all light, and so, 
burning in the flame of the Holy Spirit, it spreads itself in Divine thoughts. Then, in 
the midst of the Divine fire it is impossible for it to think about its own affairs and 
wishes (Superconsciousness, p. 370; Philokalia, vol. V, P. 475). 
St Basil the Great says about Divine revelation: 
Wholly unutterable and indescribable is the lightning-like radiance of Divine beauty; 
no word can express it, and no ear can take it in. If we name the brightness of the day, 
the light of the moon or the radiance of the sun -none of this is worthy of being 
compared with the glory of the true light and is, by comparison, further removed from 
it than the deepest night or the most terrible darkness is removed from the brightness 
of noon. When this beauty, invisible to bodily eyes and apprehended only by the soul 
and by thought, illumined some of the saints, piercing them through with an 
unbearable longing for the vision of Divine beauty to last for eternity, then were they 
repelled by the present life and bore it like irksome fetters (Superconsciousness, p. 
372, Philokalia, vol. V).

[PAG 256]
A strange word will I say to you [says St Theognis], do not be surprised. There is a 
hidden sacrament which takes place between God and the soul. This happens to those 
who have reached the highest measure of perfect purity of love and faith, when a 
man, completely transformed, ceaselessly unites with God, as His own, through 
prayer and contemplation (Superconsciousness, p. 381; Philokalia, vol. Ill, p. 396). 
Some passages from the writings of Clement of Alexandria (second century) are 
extremely interesting. 
Painting appears to take in the whole field of view in the scenes represented. But it 
gives a false description of the view, according to the rules of the art, employing the 
signs that result from the incidence of the lines of vision. By this means, the higher 
and the lower points in the view, and those between, are preserved; and some objects 
seem to appear in the foreground, and others in the background, and others to appear 
in some other way, on the smooth and level surface. So also philosophers copy truth, 
after the manner of painting.* 
Clement of Alexandria points here to a very important aspect of truth, namely, to the 
impossibility of expressing it in words, and to the conditional character of all 
philosophical systems and formulations. His idea is that dialectically truth is 
represented only in perspective, i.e. inevitably in a distorted form. 
How much time and labour would be saved, and how much useless suffering 
humanity would be spared, if it could understand the simple fact that truth cannot be 
expressed in our language. Then men would cease to think that they possessed truth, 
would cease to force other people to accept their truth at any cost. They would think 
then that others may approach truth from another side, just as they themselves 
approach it from their own side. How many arguments, how many religious conflicts, 
how much coercion of the thought of others would be unnecessary and impossible if 
men realized that no one has the truth, but that all are seeking it, each in his own way. 
The ideas of Clement of Alexandria about God are very interesting. They are very 
similar to those of the Vedânta and especially to those of Chinese philosophers. 
The discourse respecting God is most difficult to handle. For, since the first principle 
of everything is difficult to find out, the absolutely first and oldest principle, which is 
the cause of all other things being and having been, is difficult to exhibit. For how can 
that be expressed which has neither genus, nor difference, nor species, nor individual, 
nor number; 
* Extracts from the Writings of Clement of Alexandria, The Theosophical Society, 1905.

[PAG 257]
nay more, is neither an event nor that to which an event happens? No one can rightly 
express Him wholly. For on account of His greatness He is ranked as the All and is 
the Father of the Universe. Nor are any parts to be predicated of Him. For the One is 
indivisible, wherefore also it is infinite, not considered with reference to 
inscrutability, but with reference to its being without dimensions, and not having a 
limit. And therefore it is without form and name. And if we name it, we do not do so 
properly, terming it either the One, or the Good, or Mind, or Absolute Being, or 
Father, or God, or Creator, or Lord. We speak, not as supplying His name, but for 
want we use good names, in order that the mind may have these as points of support, 
so as not to err in other respects.* 
Among the Chinese philosopher-mystics our attention is arrested by Lao-Tzu 
(sixth century BC) and Chuang Tzu (fourth century BC), on account of the 
clearness of their thought and the extraordinary simplicity with which they 
express the most profound doctrines of idealism. 
The Sayings of Lao-Tzu 
The Tao which can be expressed in words is not the eternal Tao; the name which can 
be uttered is not its eternal name. . . . 
Tao eludes the sense of sight, and is therefore called colourless. It eludes the sense 
of hearing, and is therefore called soundless. It eludes the sense of touch, and is 
therefore called incorporeal. These three qualities cannot be apprehended, and hence 
they may be blended into unity. . . . 
Ceaseless in action, it cannot be named, but returns again to nothingness. We may 
call it the form of the formless, the image of the imageless, the fleeting and the 
indeterminable. . . . 
There is something, chaotic yet complete, which existed before heaven and earth. 
Oh, how still it is, and formless, standing alone without changing, reaching 
everywhere without suffering harm! . . . 
Its name I know not. To designate it, I call it Tao. Endeavouring to describe it, I 
call it Great. 
Being Great, it passes on; passing on; it becomes remote; having become remote, 
it returns. . . . 
The law of Tao is its own spontaneity. 
Tao in its unchanging aspect has no name. 
The mightiest manifestations of active force flow solely from Tao. 
Tao as it exists in the world is like the great rivers and seas which receive the 
streams from the valleys. 
All-pervading is the Great Tao. It can be at once on the right hand and on the left. 
. . . 
Tao is a great square with no angles ... a great sound which cannot be heard, a 
great image with no form. . . . 
* Ibid.

[PAG 258]
Tao produced Unity; Unity produced Duality; Duality produced Trinity; 
and Trinity produced all existing objects. . . . 
He who acts in accordance with Tao, becomes one with Tao. . . . 
All the world says that my Tao is great, but unlike other teachings. If it had this 
likeness, long ago would its smallness have been known. . . . 
The sage attends to the inner and not to the outer; he puts away the objective and 
holds to the subjective. 
The sage occupies himself with inaction, and conveys instruction without words. . 
. . 
Who is there that can make muddy water clear? But if allowed to remain still, it 
will gradually become clear of itself. Who is there that can secure a state of absolute 
repose? But let time go on, and the state of repose will gradually arise. . . . 
Tao is eternally inactive, and yet it leaves nothing undone. . . . 
The pursuit of book-learning brings about daily increase [i.e. increase of 
knowledge]. The practice of Tao brings about daily loss [i.e. loss of ignorance]. 
Repeat this loss again and again, and you arrive at inaction. Practise inaction, and 
there is nothing which cannot be done. . . . 
Practise inaction, occupy yourself with doing nothing. . . . 
Leave all things to take their natural course, and do not interfere. . . . 
All things in Nature work silently. . . . 
Among mankind, the recognition of beauty as such implies the idea of ugliness, 
and the recognition of good implies the idea of evil. . . . 
Cast off your holiness, rid yourself of sagacity, and the people will benefit a 
hundredfold. . . . 
Those who know do not speak; those who speak do not know. 
He who acts, destroys; he who grasps, loses. Therefore the sage does not act, and 
so does not destroy; he does not grasp, and so he does not lose. . . . 
The soft overcomes the hard; the weak overcomes the strong. There is no one in 
the world but knows this truth, and no one who can put it into practice.* 
Musings of Chuang-Tzu 
You cannot speak of ocean to a well-frog - the creature of a narrower sphere. You 
cannot speak of ice to a summer insect - the creature of a season. You cannot speak 
of Tao to a pedagogue: his scope is too restricted. 
But now that you have emerged from your narrow sphere and have seen the great 
ocean, you know your own insignificance, and I can speak to you of great principles. 
. . . 
Dimensions are limitless; time is endless. Conditions are not invariable; 
terms are not final. 
There is nothing which is not objective; there is nothing which is not subjective. 
But it is impossible to start from the objective. Only from subjective knowledge is it 
possible to proceed to objective knowledge. . . . 
* The Sayings of Lao-Tzu, trs. Lionel Giles, London, 1905.

[PAG 259]
When subjective and objective are both without their correlates, that is the very 
axis of Tao. 
Tao has its laws and its evidences. It is devoid both of action and of form. 
It may be obtained but cannot be seen. 
Spiritual beings draw their spirituality therefrom. 
To Tao no point in time is long ago. 
Tao cannot be existent. If it were existent, it could not be non-existent. The very 
name of Tao is only adapted for convenience's sake. Predestination and chance are 
limited to material existences. How can they bear upon the infinite? 
Tao is something beyond material existences. It cannot be conveyed either by 
words or by silence. In that state which is neither speech nor silence, its 
transcendental nature may be apprehended.* 
In contemporary theosophical literature, two small books stand alone among the 
rest: The Voice of the Silence by H. P. Blavatsky and Light on the Path by Mabel 
Collins. Both contain many genuine mystical sensations. 
The Voice of the Silence ** 
He who would hear the voice of the silence, the soundless sound, and comprehend it, 
he has to learn the nature of the intense and perfect concentration of the mind upon 
some one interior object, accompanied by a complete abstraction from everything 
pertaining to the external universe, or the world of the senses. 
Having become indifferent to objects of perception, the pupil must seek out the 
Raja of the senses, the thought-producer, he who awakes illusion. 
The mind is the greater slayer of the Real. 
Let the disciple slay the slayer. 
For when to himself his form appears unreal, as do on waking all the forms he 
sees in dreams; when he has ceased to hear the many, he may discern the One - the 
inner sound which kills the outer. 
Then only, not till then, shall he forsake the region of the false, to come into the 
realm of the true. 
Before the soul can see, the harmony within must be attained, and fleshly eyes be 
rendered blind to all illusion. 
Before the soul can hear, the image (man) has to become as deaf to roarings as to 
whispers, to cries of bellowing elephants as to the silvery buzzing of the golden fire­
fly. 
And then to the inner ear will speak 
The Voice of the Silence and 
say: 
* Musings of a Chinese Mystic, trs. Lionel Giles, Wisdom of the East Series. ** The 
Voice of the Silence, trs. H. P. Blavatsky, London and New York, Theosophical 
Publishing House, 1937.

[PAG 260]
If thy soul smiles while bathing in the sunlight of thy life; if thy soul sings within 
thy chrysalis of flesh and matter; if thy soul weeps inside her castle of illusion; if thy 
soul struggles to break the silver thread that binds her to the Master; know, 0 
disciple, thy soul is of the earth. . . . 
Give up thy life, if thou would'st live. . . . 
Learn to discern the real from the false, the everfleeting from the everlasting. 
Learn above all to separate head-learning from soul-wisdom, the 'eye' from the 'heart' 
doctrine. 
Light on the Path, like The Voice of the Silence is full of symbols, allusions 
and hidden meaning. This little book must be deeply read. Its meaning now 
disappears, now appears again. It should be read in a special mood. Light on 
the Path prepares the 'disciple' to meet the 'Master', i.e. it prepares the 
ordinary consciousness for communion with higher consciousness. The term 
Master is used, according to the author of Light on the Path, as the symbol of 
the 'Divine Life'.* 
Light on the Path 
Before the eyes can see, they must be incapable of tears. Before the ear can hear, it 
must have lost its sensitiveness. Before the voice can speak in the presence of the 
Masters it must have lost the power to wound. Before the soul can stand in the 
presence of the Masters its feet must be washed in the blood of the heart. . . . 
Kill out all sense of separateness. 
Desire only that which is within you. 
Desire only that which is beyond you. 
Desire only that which is unattainable. 
For within you is the light of the world. . . . If you are unable to perceive it within 
you, it is useless to look for it elsewhere. ... It is unattainable, because it forever 
recedes. You will enter the light, but you will never touch the flame. . . . 
Seek out the way. 
Look for the flower to bloom in the silence that follows the storm: not till then. . . . 
And in the deep silence the mysterious event will occur which will prove that the 
way has been found. Call it by what name you will, it is a voice that speaks where 
there is none to speak - it is a messenger that comes, a messenger without form or 
substance; or it is the flower of the soul that has opened. It cannot be described by 
any metaphor. . . . 
* Mabel Collins, Light on the Path, Theosophical Publishing House, London, 
1912, reprinted 1936.

[PAG 261]
To hear the voice of the silence is to understand that from within comes the only 
true guidance ... for when the disciple is ready the Master is ready also. . . . Hold 
fast to that which has neither substance nor existence. 
Listen only to the voice which is soundless. 
Look only on that which is invisible. 
In his book, Professor James calls attention to the extraordinarily vivid emotionality of 
mystical experiences and to the completely unusual sensations experienced by the 
mystics. 
The deliciousness of some of these states seems to be beyond anything known in 
ordinary consciousness. It evidently involves organic sensibilities, for it is spoken of 
as something too extreme to be borne, and as verging on bodily pain. But it is too 
subtle and piercing a delight for ordinary words to denote. God's touches, the wounds 
of his spear, references to ebriety and to nuptial union have to figure in the 
phraseology by which it is shadowed forth.* 
The joy of contact with the Deity, described by St Simeon the New Theologian 
(tenth century) may serve as an example of such a state. ** 
I am pierced by the arrow of His love [writes St Simeon]... He is Himself inside me, 
in my heart; he embraces me, kisses me, fills me with light. ... A new flower grows in 
me, new because it is full of joy. . . . The flower is of an indescribable form, is seen 
only while it comes out, then it suddenly disappears. ... It is of indescribable 
appearance; it draws my mind to itself and does not let me remember anything 
connected with fear; 
it makes me forget everything, and then suddenly vanishes. Then the tree of fear 
remains again without fruit; I moan in sorrow and pray to thee, my Christ; again I see 
the flower on the branches. I fasten my attention to it alone, and I see not only the 
tree, but also the brilliant flower which draws me irresistibly. In the end the flower 
transforms itself into the fruit of love. ... It is inexplicable how from fear grows love. 
Mysticism permeates all religions. 
In India [says Professor James] training in mystical insight has been known from 
time immemorial under the name of Yoga. Yoga means the experimental union of the 
individual with the divine. It is based on persevering exercise, and the diet, posture, 
breathing, intellectual concentration, and moral discipline vary slightly in the 
different systems which teach it. The yogi, or disciple, who has by these means 
overcome the obstructions of his lower nature sufficiently, enters into the conditions 
termed samâdhi, and 
* William James, The Varieties of Religions Experience, New York, Longmans 
Green, 1917. 
** Paul Anikieff, Mysticism of St Simeon the New Theologian, St Petersburg, 1906.

[PAG 262]
comes face to face with facts which no instinct or reason can ever know. . . . 
When a man comes out of samâdhi, they [the Vedântists] assure us that he 
remains 'enlightened, a sage, a prophet, a saint, his whole character changed, his life 
changed, illumined.' 
The Buddhists use the word 'samâdhi' as well as the Hindus; but 'dhyâna' is their 
special word for higher states of contemplation. . . . 
Higher states still of contemplation are mentioned - a region where there exists 
nothing, and where the meditator says: 'There exists absolutely nothing,' and stops. 
Then he reaches another region where he says: 'There are neither ideas nor absence 
of ideas,' and stops again. Then another region where, 'having reached the end of 
both idea and perception, he stops finally'. This would seem to be not yet Nirvana, 
but as close an approach to it as this life affords.* 
In Mohammedanism there is also a great deal of mysticism. The most characteristic 
expression of Mohammedan mysticism is Persian Sufism. 'Sufism' is both a religious 
sect and a philosophical school of a very high idealistic character, which struggled 
against materialism as well as against narrow fanaticism and the literal understanding 
of the Koran. The Sufis interpreted the Koran mystically. Sufism is the philosophical 
free-thinking of Mohammedanism, coupled with their own peculiar symbolic and 
vividly sensual poetry which always has a hidden mystical meaning. The blossoming 
time of Sufism was in the first centuries of the second millenium of the Christian era. 
Sufism remained for. a long time incomprehensible to European thought. From the 
point of view of Christian theology and Christian morality a combination of sensuality 
and religious ecstasy is inadmissible. But in the East the two managed to exist together 
in perfect harmony. In the Christian world the 'carnal' was always considered inimical 
to the 'spiritual'. In the Moslem world the carnal and sensual was accepted as a symbol 
of the spiritual. The expression of religious and philosophical truths 'in the language of 
love' was a very widely spread custom in the East. These are the 'Oriental flowers of 
eloquence'. All allegories, all metaphors were borrowed from 'love'. 'Mohammed fell in 
love with God', say the Arabs, wishing to convey the ardent quality of Mohammed's 
religious feeling. 'Choose a fresh wife every spring - on New Year's Day; for the 
Almanac of last year is good for nothing,'** says the Persian poet and philosopher 
Sadi. In this curious form Sadi expresses the thought which Ibsen puts in the mouth of 
Dr Stockman: 'Truths are by no means the wiry Methuselahs some people think them. 
A normally constituted truth 
* The Varieties of Religions Experience. 
** Sadi's Scroll of Wisdom, Wisdom of the East Series, London, 1913.

[PAG 263]
lives — let us say - as a rule, seventeen or eighteen years; . . . very seldom 
more.'* 
The poetry of the Sufis will become clearer to us if we bear in mind this generally 
sensual character of the literary language of the East, which comes from the deepest 
antiquity. An example of this ancient literature is the Song of Songs. 
Many passages in the Bible and all ancient Eastern myths and tales have this 
characteristic sensual imagery which is so strange to us. 
'Sufi poets, for the most part, wrote about the love of God in terms applied to their 
beautiful women,' says F. H. Davis, translator of Jami and other poets, 'for the simple 
reason that no one can write the celestial language and be understood at the same 
time.' ** 
The idea of the Sufis, says M. Müller, is a loving union of the soul with God. 
The Sufi holds that there is nothing in human language that can express the love 
between the soul and God so well as the love between man and woman, and that if he 
is to speak of the union between the two at all, he can only do so in the symbolical 
language of earthly love. . . . When we read some of the Sufi enraptured poetry, we 
must remember that the Sufi poets use a number of expressions which have a 
recognized meaning in their language. Thus sleep signifies meditation; perfume, hope 
of divine favour; . . . kisses and embraces, the raptures of piety. . . . Wine means 
spiritual knowledge, and so on. 
As Sady says, the flowers which a lover of God has gathered in his rose-garden, 
and which he wishes to give to his friends, so overpowered his mind by their 
fragrance, that they fell out of his lap and withered; that is to say, the glory of ecstatic 
visions pales and fades away when it has to be put into human language. *** 
Generally speaking, in Sufism poetry and mysticism are merged more than 
anywhere else in the world. Sufi poets often led strange lives as hermits, anchorites, 
pilgrims, at the same time singing of love, the beauty of women, the perfume of roses 
and wine. 
Jelal-ed-din Rumi describes the union of the soul with God in the following way: 
A loved one said to her lover to try him, early in the morning; 'O such a one, son of 
such a one, I marvel, whether you hold me more dear, or yourself; tell me truly, 0 
ardent lover!' He answered: 'I am so entirely absorbed in you, that I am full of you 
from head to fool. Of my own existence nothing but the name remains, in my being is 
nothing besides 
* Henrik Ibsen, An Enemy of the People, London, W. Heinemann, 1907. ** The 
Persian Mystics, vol. I, Wisdom of the East Series, London, 1907. *** Max Müller, 
Theosophy or Psychological Religion, New York, Longmans Green, 1899.

[PAG 264]
you, O object of my desire. Therefore I am thus lost in you ... as a stone, which has 
been changed into a pure ruby, is filled with the bright light of the sun.'* 
In two well-known poems of Jami (fifteenth century) 'Salâmân and Absâl' and 
'Yusuf and Zulaikha', the 'ascending of the soul', its purification and its union with 
God are described in the most passionate forms. 
In his book. The Varieties of Religious Experience, Professor James gives a 
great deal of attention to mystical states under narcosis. 
It is a realm [he says] that public opinion and ethical philosophy have long since 
branded as pathological, though private practice and certain lyric strains of poetry 
seem still to bear witness of its ideality. . . . 
Nitrous oxide and ether, especially nitrous oxide, when sufficiently diluted with 
air, stimulate the mystical consciousness in an extraordinary degree. Depth beyond 
depth of truth seems revealed to the inhaler. This truth fades out, however, or 
escapes, at the moment of coming to; and if any words remain over in which it 
seemed to clothe itself, they prove to be the variest nonsense. Nevertheless, the 
sense of a profound meaning having been there persists; and I know more than one 
person who is persuaded that in the nitrous oxide trance we have a genuine 
metaphysical revelation. 
Some years ago I myself made some observations on this aspect of nitrous oxide 
intoxication, and reported them in print. One conclusion was forced upon my mind 
at that time, and my impression of its truth has ever since remained unshaken. It is 
that our normal waking consciousness, rational consciousness as we call it, is but 
one special type of consciousness, whilst all about it, parted from it by the filmiest 
of screens, there lie potential forms of consciousness entirely different. We may go 
through life without suspecting their existence; but apply the requisite stimulus, and 
at a touch they are there in all their completeness, definite types of mentality which 
probably somewhere have their field of application and adaptation. No account of 
the universe in its totality can be final which leaves these other forms of 
consciousness quite disregarded. ... At any rate, they forb