=== Tertium Organum (P. D. Ouspensky).pdf — CHUNK 8/18 ===
Chars: 45,000 | Offset: 309,926



[PAG 128]
CHAPTER 13 
The apparent and the hidden side of life. Positivism as the study of the phenomenal 
aspect of life. What constitutes the 'two-dimensionality' of positivist philosophy? 
Envisaging everything on one plane, in one physical sequence. Streams flowing under 
the earth. What can the study of life, as a phenomenon, give? The artificial world 
which science builds for itself. The non-existence, in actual fact, of completed and 
isolated phenomena. A new sense of the world. 
There are visible and hidden causes of phenomena, there are visible and 
hidden effects. 
Let us take an example. 
In all the text-books on the history of literature it is said that in its time 
Werther produced in Germany an epidemic of suicides. 
What did produce these suicides? 
Let us now imagine that some 'scientist' appears who, being interested in 
the fact of increased suicides, begins to study the first edition of Werther 
according to the methods of exact positivist science. He weighs the book, 
measures it by the most precise instruments, notes down the number of pages, 
makes a chemical analysis of the paper and the printer's ink, counts the 
number of lines on each page, the number of letters and the number of 
punctuation marks and, finally, he calculates how many times the letter A is 
repeated in Werther, how many times the letter B, how many times the 
question mark, and so on. In a word, he does all that pious Muslims used to 
do with the Koran of Mohammed. And, on the basis of his investigations he 
writes a treatise on the relation of the letter A of the German alphabet to 
suicides. 
Let us imagine another scientist who, studying the history of painting,
decides to put it on a scientific basis and undertakes a long series of analyses 
of the pigments used in famous paintings with the object of defining the 
causes of the different effects produced on us by different paintings. 
Let us imagine a savage, 'studying' a watch. Let us suppose that the savage
is intelligent and cunning. He has taken the watch to pieces and has counted 
all the wheels and screws, has counted the number of teeth on each wheel and 
knows the watch like the palm of his hand. The only thing he does not know 
is - what it is for. Nor does he know

[PAG 129]
that the hand travels round the dial in twelve hours, i.e. that one can tell time by the 
watch. 
All this is 'positivism'. 
We are too accustomed to 'positivist' methods and fail to notice that they lead to 
absurdities and, if we seek the explanation of the meaning of something, they 
completely fail to achieve this. 
The truth is that for explaining the meaning positivism is no good. Nature is for it a 
closed book of which it only studies the outer aspect. In the matter of studying the 
action of nature positivist methods go very far, as is proven by all the innumerable 
achievements of modern technical sciences, including aviation. But everything in the 
world has its definite sphere of action. Positivism is very good when it seeks an answer 
to the question how something operates in given conditions. But when it attempts to go 
beyond its definite conditions (time, space and causation), or begins to assert that 
outside the given conditions nothing exists, it obviously trespasses on a sphere alien to 
it. 
It is true that more serious positivist thinkers deny all possibility of questions 'why' 
and 'wherefore' in 'positivist investigation'. Positivist philosophy regards the search for 
meaning and purpose as almost an absurdity. There is, of course, more truth in this, 
because teleology, from the positivist point of view, is indeed an absurdity. But as a 
matter of fact the positivist point of view is not the only one possible. The usual 
mistake of positivism lies in the fact that it sees nothing but itself and either considers 
everything to be possible for it, or regards as generally impossible many things that are 
actually quite possible but not for positivist study. 
However, mankind will never stop seeking answers to the questions why and 
wherefore. 
In relation to nature a positivist scientist is almost in the same position as a savage in 
a library filled with valuable rare books. For a savage a book is a thing of a certain size 
and weight. However long he may puzzle over the purpose of this strange thing, he will 
never understand it by its appearance, and the content of the book will remain for him 
the unfathomable noumenon. And the contents of nature are just as unfathomable for a 
positivist scientist. 
But if a man knows of the existence of the contents of the book - the noumenon of 
life - if he knows that a mysterious meaning is hidden under visible phenomena, it is 
possible that, in the end, he will get to the essence of the thing. 
For this it is necessary to understand the idea of the inner content, i.e. the meaning of 
the thing in itself.

[PAG 130]
The scientist who finds tablets with hieroglyphs or wedge-shaped
inscriptions in an unknown language, deciphers and reads them after a great
deal of work. And in order to read them he needs only one thing: he must 
know that these signs represent writing. As long as he regards them as mere 
ornament, an external embellishment of the tablets, or an accidental design 
unconnected with any meaning, their significance and meaning will remain 
completely closed to him. But as soon as he presupposes the existence of this 
meaning, the possibility of grasping it arises. 
Every cipher can be read, even without any key. But one must know that it 
is a cipher. This is the first and indispensable condition. Without it nothing
can be done. 
The idea of the existence of the visible and the hidden aspects of life has been 
known to philosophy long ago. Events or phenomena were admitted to 
represent only one side of the world, an apparent one, devoid of real 
existence and coming into being at the moment of our contact with the real 
world; a side infinitely small as compared with the other side. The other side, 
noumena, were regarded as really existing in themselves, but inaccessible to 
our perception. 
But there can be no greater mistake than to regard the world as divided into 
phenomena and noumena - to take phenomena and noumena as separate from 
one another, existing independently one from another and as capable of being
perceived apart from one another. This is complete philosophical illiteracy,
which manifests itself most clearly in dualistic spiritualistic theories. The 
division of phenomena and noumena exists only in our perception. The 
'phenomenal world' is merely our incorrect representation of the world. 
As Karl du Prel has said, the world beyond is only this world strangely 
perceived. It would be more correct to say that this world is only the world 
beyond strangely perceived. 
Kant's idea is quite correct that the study of the phenomenal aspect of the 
world will not bring us nearer to the understanding of 'things in themselves'. 
A 'thing in itself is a thing as it exists in itself, independently of us. The 
'phenomenon of a thing' is the thing in that aspect of it which we perceive. 
The example of a book in the hands of an illiterate savage demonstrates quite 
clearly that it is sufficient to be unaware of the existence of the noumenon of 
a thing (the contents of the book in this case) for it not to manifest itself in 
phenomena. But the knowledge of its existence is sufficient to open up the 
possibility

[PAG 131]
of finding it by means of the very same phenomena the study of which would 
have been utterly useless without the knowledge of the existence of the 
noumenon. 
Just as it is impossible for a savage to come nearer to understanding the 
nature of a watch by studying the phenomenal aspect of it, i.e. the number of 
wheels and the number of teeth in each wheel, so in the case of a positivist 
scientist studying the external, manifesting side of life, its secret raison d'etre 
and the purpose of separate manifestations will remain forever hidden. 
For a savage the watch would be a very interesting, complex, but quite 
useless toy. Similarly, in the eyes of a scientist-materialist a man appears to 
be a mechanism which came into being in an unknown manner, infinitely 
more complex but no less unknown as regards the purpose of its existence. 
We pictured to ourselves how incomprehensible would be the functions of 
a candle and a coin for a plane-being, studying two identical circles on its 
plane. To a scientist who studies man as a mechanism, his functions will be 
equally incomprehensible. It is clear why this should be so. It is because the 
candle and the coin are not two identical circles, but two quite different 
objects, having a totally different meaning and use in the world which is 
higher than the plane-world. Similarly, a man is not a mechanism, but 
something having a purpose and meaning in a world higher than the visible 
world. 
The functions of the candle and the coin in our world are, for the imaginary
plane-being, an inaccessible noumenon. It is quite clear that the phenomenon 
of a circle cannot give any idea of the function of the candle and its difference 
from the coin. But two-dimensional perception exists not only on a plane. 
Materialistic thought tries to apply it to real life. As a result curious 
absurdities arise, the true meanings of which are, unfortunately,
incomprehensible to many people. One of such results is the 'economic man' ­
quite clearly a two-dimensional plane-being which moves in two directions ­
those of production and of consumption, i.e. a being living on the plane of 
production-consumption. How is it possible to represent man in general in the 
form of such an obviously artificial being? And how is it possible to expect to 
understand the laws of man's life with his complex spiritual pursuits - with the 
main impulse of his life being desire to know, desire to understand everything 
around him and within him - by studying the imaginary laws of life of an 
imaginary being on an imaginary plane? The answer to this question remains 
the secret of the inventors. But the economic theory attracts people as do all 
simple theories which afford a short answer to a series of long questions. But

[PAG 132]
we have become much too involved in materialistic theories and see nothing
beyond them. 
Positivist science does not fundamentally deny the doctrine of phenomena 
and noumena; it only affirms, in opposition to Kant, that by studying
phenomena we gradually approach noumena. The noumena of phenomena 
are, in the opinion of science, the movements of atoms and of ether, or the 
vibrations of electrons. Thus science regards the universe as a whirl of 
mechanical motion or as a field of manifestation of electro-magnetic energy
which, on being perceived by the organs of sense, assume for us 'phenomenal 
colouring'. 
Positivism asserts that the phenomena of life and consciousness are merely
the functions of physical phenomena and are no more than a certain complex 
combination of the latter; and further, that all the three kinds of phenomena 
are actually the same, and the higher, i.e. the phenomena of life and 
consciousness, are nothing but different manifestations of the lower, i.e. of 
one and the same physico-mechanical or electro-magnetic energy. 
But one argument can be advanced against all this. If this were true, it 
would have been proven long ago. Nothing is easier than to prove the 
energetic hypothesis of life and consciousness. All that is needed is to obtain 
life or consciousness by mechanical means. Materialism or energetics are 
'concrete' theories which cannot be true without proof because they cannot 
fail to have proofs if they contain even a grain of truth. 
But in actual fact these theories have no proofs; on the contrary, the 
infinitely greater potentiality of phenomena of life and mental processes as 
compared with physical phenomena points to exactly the opposite. 
The above-mentioned fact of the tremendous liberating, releasing power of 
psychological phenomena is by itself sufficient to place the problem of the 
world of the hidden on an entirely real and firm basis. 
And the world of the hidden cannot be the world of unconscious 
mechanical motion, of an unconscious development of electro-magnetic 
forces. Positivist theories admit the possibility of explaining the higher by 
means of the lower, they admit the possibility of explaining the invisible by 
means of the visible. But, as has been pointed out in the beginning, this is an 
attempt to explain one unknown by means of another unknown. There is still 
less justification in explaining the known by means of the unknown. And yet 
that 'lower' (matter and

[PAG 133]
motion) by means of which the positivist theory attempts to explain the 'higher' (life 
and thought) is itself unknown. Consequently it is impossible to explain anything else 
by it. On the other hand, the higher, i.e. thought, is the only quantity we possess, the 
only thing we know and are aware of in ourselves, the only thing about which we 
cannot be mistaken or have any doubts. And, since thought can evoke and release 
physical energy, whereas motion can never evoke or release thought (a rotating wheel 
can never evoke thought), it obviously follows that we must strive to define not the 
higher by means of the lower, but the lower by means of the higher. And, since the 
invisible, such as the contents of a book or the purpose of a watch, defines the visible, 
we must also strive to understand not the visible, but the invisible. 
Starting from the false assumption of the mechanical character of the noumenal 
aspect of nature, positivist science, on which the view of the world of the majority of 
modern educated humanity is founded, makes yet another mistake in examining the law 
of cause and effect or the law of function - namely, it mistakes what is cause for what is 
effect. 
Just as the two-dimensional plane-being regards the phenomena which reach its 
consciousness as lying on one plane, so the positivist view strives to interpret on one 
plane all phenomena of different orders, i.e. to explain all visible phenomena as effects 
of other visible phenomena and as the inevitable cause of subsequent visible phen­
omena. In other words, it regards as having causal and functional interdependence only 
those phenomena which take place on the surface, and it studies the visible world or the 
phenomena of the visible world, refusing to admit that causes not contained in this 
world could have penetrated into it or that phenomena of this world could have 
functions outside it. 
But again this could be true only if this world contained no phenomena of life and 
thought, or if phenomena of life and of mental processes were actually derivatives from 
physical phenomena instead of being endowed with an infinitely greater hidden force 
than the latter. Then we would have been justified in examining the chains of 
phenomena only in their physical or visible sequence, as positivist philosophy does. But 
if we take into consideration the phenomena of life and thought, we are forced to admit 
that the chain of phenomena very quickly passes from a purely physical sequence into a 
biological sequence, i.e. one which already contains much that is hidden and invisible 
to us, or to a psychological sequence where still more is hidden.

[PAG 134]
We must admit too that in the reverse transition into the physical sequence 
from the biological and the psychological spheres actions proceed, often if 
not always, precisely from those sides which are hidden from us, i.e. that the 
cause of the visible is the invisible. As a result we are bound to admit that it is 
impossible to consider chains or sequences solely in the world of physical 
phenomena. When such a sequence touches the life of a man or that of a 
human community, we see clearly that it often goes out of the 'physical 
sphere' and then once more returns to it. Looking at the matter from this point
of view we shall see that both in the life of an individual man and in the life 
of a human community there are many streams which at times emerge upon 
the surface, breaking through in boisterous torrents, and at times go deep 
underground and become hidden from view, not disappearing altogether, but 
merely biding their time to emerge once more upon the surface. 
We observe in the world continuous chains of phenomena and we see these 
chains pass from one order of phenomena to another without interruption. We 
see how phenomena of consciousness -thoughts, feelings, desires - are 
accompanied by physiological phenomena, possibly even creating them, and 
give rise to a series of purely physical phenomena; and we see how physical
phenomena, in becoming the object of sensations of sight, hearing, touch, 
smell and others, provoke physiological phenomena, and then psychological. 
But, looking at life from outside, we only see physical phenomena and, 
having persuaded ourselves that they alone represent reality, we may not 
notice the others at all. Here is where the enormous power of suggestion of 
current ideas makes itself felt. To a sincere positivist every metaphysical 
argument proving the unreality of matter or energy seems sophistry. To him it 
seems something unnecessary, annoying, interfering with the proper progress 
of thought, a senseless and aimless attack against that which, in his opinion, 
is alone firmly established, is alone immutable and lies at the foundation of 
everything. He impatiently waves away 'idealistic' and 'mystical' theories as 
he would a buzzing mosquito. . . . 
But the fact of the matter is that thought and energy are different in their 
essence and cannot be one and the same thing because they are different 
aspects of the same thing. If we were to open the skull of a living man and 
see all the vibrations in the cells of the grey matter of the brain and all the 
quiverings of the white matter, it would still be only motion, i.e. 
manifestations of energy, and thought would remain somewhere beyond the 
field of investigation, receding from it at every approach, like a shadow. 
When he begins to realize this, a

[PAG 135]
'positivist' feels the ground crumbling under his feet, feels that by this method 
he will never come nearer to thought And he sees clearly the necessity of a 
new method The mere thought of this makes him suddenly notice all around 
him things he had not noticed before His eyes become open to things which 
formerly he refused to see Walls, which he had built round himself begin to 
crumble one after the other and, beyond the crumbling walls, infinite vistas of 
hitherto undreamt-of possible knowledge begin to unfold before his eyes 
And then he completely alters his view of everything surrounding him He 
realizes that the visible is produced by the invisible, and that, without 
understanding the invisible, it is impossible to understand the visible His 
'positivism' begins to totter, and if he is a man of daring thought, then one 
fine day he will see that precisely that which he considered real and true is 
unreal and false, whereas what he regarded as false is real and true 
He sees, first of all, that manifested physical phenomena often disappear
from view, like a stream gone underground But they do not vanish 
completely, they continue to live in a latent form in some minds, in someone's 
memory, in some people's words or in books, just as the future harvest is 
latent in the seed And then they again burst out into the open, pass from the 
latent to the manifest, producing noise, uproar, motion 
We witness these transitions of the invisible into the visible in a man's 
personal life, in the life of peoples, in the history of mankind These chains of 
events go on continuously, interwoven among themselves, interpenetrating 
one another, disappearing at times from our view, and reappearing once again 
I find an admirable description of this idea in the chapter on 'Karma' in 
Light on the Path by Mabel Collins 
Consider with me that the individual existence is a rope which stretches from the 
infinite to the infinite, and has no end and no commencement, neither is it capable of 
being broken The rope is formed of innumerable fine threads, which, lying closely 
together, form its thickness
 And remember that the threads are living - like electric 
wires, more, are like quivering nerves 
But eventually the long strands, the living threads which in their unbroken 
continuity form the individual, pass out of the shadow into the shine 
This illustration presents but a small portion - a single side of the truth it is less 
than a fragment Yet, dwell on it, by its aid you may be led to perceive more What it 
is necessary first to understand is not that the future is arbitrarily formed by any 
separate acts of the present, but that the whole of the future is an unbroken continuity 
with the present, as the present is with

[PAG 136]
the past. On one plane, from one point of view, the illustration of the rope is correct.* 
The quoted passage shows us that the idea of Karma, evolved in remote antiquity by 
Hindu philosophy, is the idea of the unbroken sequence of phenomena. Each 
phenomenon, however small, is a link in the endless and unbroken chain, stretching 
from the past into the future, passing from one sphere into another, now appearing in 
the guise of physical phenomena, now disappearing in the phenomena of 
consciousness. 
If we examine the idea of Karma from the standpoint of our theory of time and space 
of many dimensions, the interconnection of separate events will cease to appear to us 
miraculous and incomprehensible. Since events, even the most distant from one 
another in time, are in contact with the fourth dimension, this means that, in reality, 
they take place simultaneously, as cause and effect. And the walls dividing them are 
nothing more than an illusion which our weak mind is unable to overcome. Things are 
linked together not by time but by an inner connection, an inner relationship. And time 
cannot separate things which are inwardly close and follow one from another. Certain 
other properties of these things make them appear to us divided by the ocean of time. 
But we know that this ocean has no real existence and we begin to understand how and 
why events of one millennium can have a direct influence on the events of another 
millennium. 
The hidden activity of events becomes clear to us. We understand that, in our eyes, 
events must become hidden in order to preserve for us the illusion of time. 
This we know, that today's events were yesterday's ideas and feelings, and 
tomorrow's events lie today in some person's irritation, someone's hunger, someone's 
suffering and maybe still more in someone's imagination, someone's fantasy, someone's 
dreams. We know all this, and yet our 'positivist' science stubbornly continues only to 
see the sequence of visible phenomena, i.e. regards each visible or physical 
phenomenon as the effect of only another physical phenomenon, just as visible. 
This tendency to see everything on one plane, this reluctance to recognize anything 
outside that plane, narrows our view so terribly that it prevents us from grasping life in 
its entirety. Together with the materialistic attempts to explain the higher as a function 
of the lower, it is the chief obstacle to the development of our knowledge, the main 
* Mabel Collins, Light on the Path and Karma, Theosophical Publishing House, 
London and New York, 1912, reprinted 1936, pp. 96-8.

[PAG 137]
cause of dissatisfaction with science, of complaints about the bankruptcy of science and 
of its actual bankruptcy in many respects. 
Dissatisfaction with science is well grounded and complaints of its insolvency are 
perfectly justified, because science has actually come to an impasse from which there is 
no way out, and it is only a matter of time before it is openly admitted that its main 
tendencies have led it completely astray. 
We may say - not as a supposition but as a definite affirmation -that the world of 
physical phenomena represents as it were a section of another world, which also exists 
here, and the events of which take place here, but invisibly to us. Nothing is more 
miraculous and supernatural than life. Take a street of a large town, in all its details, 
and you will get an enormous diversity of facts. But how much is hidden behind these 
facts and cannot be seen at all! How many desires, passions, greedy and covetous 
thoughts, how much suffering both petty and great, how much deceit, falsity, lies, how 
many invisible threads - sympathies, antipathies, interests - linking this street with the 
whole world, with all the past and all the future. If we picture all this to ourselves we 
shall see clearly that a street cannot be studied merely by what is visible. We must 
probe deeper. The complex and vast phenomenon of the street will not reveal its infinite 
noumenon, connected both with eternity and with time, with the past, with the future 
and with the whole world. 
Consequently we have every right to regard the visible phenomenal world as a 
section of some other world, infinitely more complex, which at a given moment is 
manifesting itself for us in the first one. 
This world of noumena is infinite and incomprehensible for us, just as the three­
dimensional world in all the variety of its functions is incomprehensible for the two­
dimensional being. The nearest approximation to 'truth' possible for man is contained in 
the formulation: each thing has an infinite variety of meanings, and to know all these 
meanings is impossible. In other words, 'truth' as we understand it, i.e. the finite 
definition, is possible only in a finite series of phenomena. In an infinite series it is 
bound, somewhere, to become its own opposite. 
This last thought was expressed by Hegel: 'Every idea, extended to infinity, becomes 
its own opposite.' 
It is precisely this change of meaning which is the reason why the noumenal world is 
incomprehensible for man. The essence of a thing, i.e. the thing in itself, is contained in 
the infinite number of

[PAG 138]
functions and meanings of the thing which cannot be grasped by our mind.  
And it is also contained in the change of meaning of one and the same thing. 
In one meaning the thing is an enormous whole including a great number of 
parts; in another meaning it is an insignificant part of a vast whole. Our mind 
cannot bind all that into one; 
therefore the essence of the thing withdraws from us as we strive to know it,  
fleeing before us like a shadow. Light on the Path says: 'You will enter the 
light, but you will never touch the flame.'  
This means that every knowledge is conditional. We can never embrace all  
the meanings of any one thing, because in order to do that we must embrace 
the whole world with all the variety of its own meanings.  
The chief difference between the phenomenal and the noumenal aspects of  
the world consists in the fact that the former is always limited, always finite, 
embracing those properties of a given thing which we can generally know as  
phenomena; the latter, the noumenal aspect, is always unlimited, always 
infinite. And we can never know the end of the hidden functions and the  
hidden meaning of any given thing. Properly speaking, they do not end at all.  
They can change endlessly, i.e. appear different and for ever new from new  
points of view, but they cannot disappear any more than they can end or stop.  
All that is highest in the understanding, to which we may come, of the 
essence, the meaning, the soul of a given phenomenon, from another, a still 
higher point of view, in a still wider generalization, will again have a  
different meaning. And there is no end to it! This is the majesty and the terror 
of infinity! 
Moreover, we must remember that the world as we know it does not represent 
anything stable. It must change with the slightest change in the forms of our  
perception. Phenomena which appear to us totally unrelated may be seen by 
another, wider consciousness as pans of one whole. Phenomena which appear 
to us completely identical may look totally different. Phenomena which  
appear to us as something whole and indivisible may in reality be very 
complex, including in themselves very varied elements which have nothing in 
common with one another. And everything together may form one whole, but  
in a category quite incomprehensible to us. Therefore, side by side with our  
view of things, another view is possible - a view as it were from another  
world, from 'over there', 'from that which lies on the other side'. 
But 'over there' signifies not another place, but another method of

[PAG 139]
perception, a new understanding. And we shall begin to look not from here 
but from over there if we regard a phenomenon not as something isolated, but 
in conjunction with all the chains intersecting in it.

[PAG 140]
CHAPTER 14 
The voices of stones. The wall of a church and the wall of a prison. The mast of a ship 
and a gallows. The shadow of a hangman and the shadow of a saint. The soul of a 
hangman and the soul of a saint. The different combinations of phenomena known to 
us in higher space. The connectedness of phenomena which seem to us separate, and 
the difference between phenomena which appear to be similar. How should we 
approach the noumenal world? The understanding of things outside the categories of 
time and space. The reality of a great many 'figures of speech'. The occult 
understanding of energy. The letter of a Hindu occultist. Art as the cognition of the 
noumenal world. What we see and what we do not see. Plato's dialogue about the 
cave. 
It seems to us that we see something and understand something. But in actual 
fact we have but a very dim sense of all that is happening around us, just as a 
snail has a dim sense of the sunlight, the rain, the darkness. 
At times we dimly feel in things the difference resulting from their 
functions, i.e. their REAL difference. 
Once I was crossing the Neva in a boat with my friend A. with whom, 
before this and later, I had many conversations on the subjects touched on in 
this book. We had been talking, but approaching the fortress we both fell 
silent, looking at the walls and probably thinking more or less, the same 
thoughts. There are factory chimneys too!' said A. And indeed from behind 
the fortress there rose brick chimneys with smoke-blackened tops.
And suddenly, as he said it, I had an incredibly vivid sensation of the 
difference between factory chimneys and prison walls, a sensation that was 
like a blow or an electric shock. I sensed the difference of the very bricks. 
And it seemed to me that A. had the same sensation. 
Later, in a conversation with A. I recalled this episode, and he told me that 
not only then, but always he had sensed this difference and was deeply 
convinced of its reality. 'Only positivism is convinced that a stone is a stone 
and nothing more,' he said. 'But any uneducated woman or a child knows 
quite well that a stone from the wall of a church or a stone from the wall of a 
prison are different things.'
Thus it seems to me that, in examining a given phenomenon in connection 
with all the chains of consequences of which it is a link, we shall find that the 
subjective sensation of the differences between

[PAG 141]
two physically identical objects, which we often regard as mere poetic imagery, a  
metaphor, the reality of which we deny - is entirely real; 
we shall see that these objects actually are different, as different as a candle and a coin 
which look like identical circles (moving lines) in the two-dimensional world of plane­ 
beings. We shall then see that objects identical as regards the material of which they 
consist, but different as regards their functions, are really different, and that this 
difference goes so deep that it even makes the seemingly identical material physically 
different. There are DIFFERENT STONES, DIFFERENT IRON, DIFFERENT WOOD, DIFFERENT 
PAPER. No chemistry will ever detect this difference. Nevertheless it exists, and there 
are people who feel and understand it. 
The mast of a ship, a gallows, a cross at the cross-roads in the steppe may be made 
of the same kind of wood, but in reality they are different objects made of different 
material. That which we see, touch, investigate are only the 'circles on the plane' made 
by the coin and the candle. They are nothing but the shadows of real things, the essence 
of which lies in their function. The shadows of a sailor, a hangman and a saint may be 
completely identical - it is impossible to distinguish them by their shadows just as it is 
impossible to distinguish the wood of the mast, the gallows and the cross by chemical 
analysis. Nevertheless they are different men and different objects - it is only the 
shadows that are equal and alike. 
And if we take men as we know them - the sailor, the hangman and the saint - men 
who seem to us similar and equal, and examine them from the point of view of their 
different functions, we shall see that, in actual fact, they are totally different and have 
nothing whatever in common. They are different beings, belonging to different 
categories, different planes of the world between which there are no bridges or ways of 
communication. These men seem to us alike and equal because, in general, we see only 
the shadows of real facts. In reality, the 'souls' of these men are totally different, and 
different not in quality, not in magnitude, not in their 'age' as people prefer to put in 
now, but different in their very nature, their origin and the purpose of their existence ­
just as objects differ when they belong to completely different categories. 
When we begin to understand this, the general concept man must undergo a great 
change in us. 
And this relation is repeated in the observation of all phenomena. A mast, a gallows 
and a cross are things of such different categories, atoms of such different bodies 
(which we know by their functions), that there can be no question of any similitude 
between them. Our

[PAG 142]
misfortune is that we regard the chemical composition of a thing as its most 
real attribute, whereas real attributes should be sought in the functions of a 
thing. Should we acquire the possibility of broadening and deepening our 
view of the chains of causation the links of which are our actions and our 
behaviour; should we learn to take them not only in their narrow meaning in 
relation to the life of man, to our own life, but in a wide cosmic meaning;
should we succeed in finding and establishing the connection between the 
simple phenomena of our life and the life 01 the cosmos, then, undoubtedly, 
we should find in the 'simplest' phenomena an infinity of the new and the 
unexpected. 
For instance, we should be able to learn in this way something entirely new 
about simple physical phenomena which we are accustomed to regard as 
natural and explicable, and concerning which we take it for granted that we 
know something. But, quite unexpectedly, we may find that we know 
nothing, that everything we have previously known is only a wrong deduction 
from wrong premises. Something infinitely vast and immeasurably
significant may become revealed to us in such phenomena as the expansion 
and contraction of solids, electrical phenomena, heat, light, sound, the 
movement of planets, the coming of day and of night, the succession of 
seasons, a thunderstorm, heat-lightning, and so on. In general, we may sud­
denly and most unexpectedly find explanations of the properties of 
phenomena which we used to accept as something known and containing 
nothing beyond what we see in them. 
The constancy, duration, periodicity or non-periodicity of phenomena may 
acquire for us an entirely new meaning and significance. Much that is new 
and unexpected may open up for us in the transition of one phenomenon into 
another. Birth, death, a man's life, his relationship with other men, love, 
enmity, sympathies, antipathies, desires, passions may suddenly appear in 
quite a new light. It is difficult for us to imagine at the present moment the 
nature of this newness which it is possible for us to feel in old familiar things; 
and, once we begin to feel it, it will be very difficult to understand. But in 
reality it is only our incapacity to feel and understand this 'newness' which 
separates us from it, for we live in it and in the midst of it. But our senses are 
too primitive, our ideas too crude for a subtle differentiation of phenomena 
which should become revealed to us in higher space. Our mind, our capacity
for association, is insufficiently flexible to grasp new correlations. 
Consequently, the first feeling brought by our acquaintance with 'that world' 
(i.e. this same world of ours, only taken without the limitations under which 
we usually view it), should be the feeling of wonder, and this wonder should 
grow,

[PAG 143]
becoming greater and greater as acquaintance with it becomes better. And the better we 
know a thing or a certain correlation of things, the closer, the more familiar they are to 
us, the greater will be our wonder and the more shall we discover in them of the new 
and the unexpected. 
Wishing to understand the noumenal world, we must seek a hidden meaning in 
everything. At present we are too deeply rooted in the positivist method with its 
tendency to seek in everything a visible cause and a visible effect. And this weight of 
positivistic habits makes the understanding of certain ideas extremely difficult. Among 
other things it is extremely hard for us to understand the reality of the difference in the 
noumenal world between objects which are similar in our world but which have 
different functions. 
However, if we want to approach to an understanding of the noumenal world, we 
must strive with all our might to notice all those apparent, 'subjective' differences 
between objects, which occasionally strike us and which sometimes we feel so 
painfully clearly, those differences which are expressed in the imagery of art and which 
give glimpses of the world of realities. These differences are the realities of the 
noumenal world, much more real than all the maya of our phenomena. 
We should strive to notice these realities and develop in ourselves the capacity to 
sense them, because it is precisely in this way (and only in this way) that we enter into 
communion with the noumenal world or the world of causes. 
I find a very interesting example of the understanding of the hidden meaning of 
phenomena in the book The Occult World contained in the letter of a Hindu occultist to 
the author of the book, A. P. Sinnett: 
We see a vast difference [he writes] between the two qualities of two equal amounts 
of energy expended by two men, one of whom, let us suppose on his way to his daily 
quiet work, and another on his way to denounce a fellow-creature at the police 
station, while the men of science see none; and we - not they - see a specific 
difference between the energy in the motion of the wind and that of a revolving 
wheel. . . . 
Every thought of man upon being evolved passes into the inner world, and 
becomes an active entity by associating itself, coalescing we might term it, with an 
elemental - that is to say, with one of the semi-intelligent forces of the kingdoms.* 
* A. P. Sinnett, The Occult World, London and New York, Theosophical Society, 
reprinted 1906.

[PAG 144]
If, for the moment, we leave aside the last pan of this quotation and take 
only the first part, we shall see that, certainly, the 'man of science' does not 
admit the difference in the quality of energy expended by two men walking ­
one to his work and the other to denounce someone. For science this 
difference is not discernible. Science does not feel it and does not recognize 
it. But perhaps in an actual fact this difference is even deeper and consists not 
only in the difference between kinds of energy but in the difference between 
the men, one of whom may develop energy of one kind and another energy of 
another kind. And we possess a form of perception which senses this 
difference perfectly, understands it and knows it. I am speaking of art. A 
musician, a painter, a sculptor understand perfectly that it is possible to walk 
differently; more than that, that it is impossible to walk in the same way. A 
workman and an informer walk differently. 
The best person to understand this, at least he should best understand it, is 
an actor. 
A poet understands that the mast of a ship, a gallows and a cross are made 
of different wood. He understands the difference between a stone from the 
wall of a church and a stone from the wall of a prison. He hears* the voices 
of stones', understands the language of ancient walls, of burial mounds, of 
ruins, rivers, woods and plains. He hears the voice of the silence, understands 
the psychological difference of silences, realizes that silence may be different. 
And this poetical understanding of the world should be developed, 
strengthened and fortified, because only through it do we come into touch 
with the truly real world. And in the real world, behind phenomena which 
seem to us the same, there are often concealed noumena so different that only 
our blindness can account for our idea of the similarity of these phenomena. 
One of the ideas which must thus prove false is the current idea of the 
similarity and equality of men. In actual fact the difference between the 
'hangman', the 'sailor' and the 'saint' is not an accidental difference of 
position, status and heredity, as materialism endeavours to persuade us, and 
not the difference between different degrees of one and the same evolution, 
as theosophy asserts, but a deep and unbridgeable difference, such as exists 
between murder, labour and prayer, belonging to entirely different worlds. 
The representatives of these worlds can appear to us similar men only
because we actually see not them but merely their shadows. 
It is necessary to make ourselves accustomed to the thought and to 
establish firmly the fact that this difference is not in the least meta-

[PAG 145]
physical but perfectly real, more real in fact than many visible differences of things and 
phenomena. 
Actually, all art consists in understanding and representing these elusive differences. 
For an artist the phenomenal world is merely material - just as colours are for the 
painter and sounds for the musician; it is only a means for the understanding, and the 
expression of his understanding, of the noumenal world. At our present stage of 
development we possess no other means for the perception of the world of causes, 
which is as powerful as the one contained in art. The mystery of life consists in the fact 
that the noumenon, i.e. the hidden meaning and the hidden function of a thing, is 
reflected in its phenomenon. The phenomenon is the reflection of the noumenon in our 
sphere. THE PHENOMENON IS AN IMAGE OF THE NOUMENON. And by the phenomenon it 
is possible to know the noumenon. Only here chemical reagents and the spectroscope 
will accomplish nothing. The reflection of the noumenon in the phenomenon can be 
sensed and understood only by that subtle apparatus which is called the soul of the 
artist. 'Occultism' - the hidden side of life - should be studied in art. An artist must be a 
clairvoyant, he must see that which others do not see. And he must be a magician, must 
possess the gift of making others see what they do not see by themselves, but what he 
sees. 
Art sees more and further than we do. It was pointed out earlier that, on the whole, 
we do not see anything, we only grope, and consequently we fail to notice those 
differences between things which do not express themselves physically or chemically. 
But art is already a beginning of vision. It sees much more than the most perfect 
apparatus; and it senses the infinite invisible facets of the crystal, one of which facets 
we call man. 
'The truth is that this earth is the scene of a drama of which we only perceive 
scattered portions, and in which the greater number of actors are invisible to us while 
we are inside our bodies.' 
Thus speaks the theosophical writer, Mabel Collins, the author of Light on the Path, in 
a small book. Illusions*. And this is very true; 
we see extraordinarily little. 
But art goes further than ordinary human vision; consequently there are sides of life 
of which only art has the right to speak. 
A remarkable attempt to portray our relation to the 'noumenal world', to that 'great life', 
is contained in the 'Dialogue of the Cave', in the VIIth book of Plato's Republic.** 
* Mabel Collins, Illusions, Theosophical Society, London, 1905. ** The 
Republic of Plato, t