=== Tertium Organum (P. D. Ouspensky).pdf — CHUNK 9/18 ===
Chars: 45,000 | Offset: 354,926

rs. Benjamin Jowett, book VII, Oxford, 1908.

[PAG 146]
Behold' human beings living in an underground den, which has a mouth open 
towards the light and reaching all along the den, here they have been from their 
childhood, and have their legs and necks chained so that they cannot move, and can 
only see before them, being prevented by the chains from turning round their heads 
Above and behind them a fire is blazing at a distance, and between the fire and the 
prisoners there is a raised way, and you will see, if you look, a low wall built along 
the way, like the screen which marionette players have in front of them, over which 
they show the puppets 
And do you see, I said, men passing along the wall carrying all sons of vessels, 
and statues and figures of animals made of wood and stone and various materials, 
which appear over the wall? Some of them are talking, others silent 
You have shown me a strange image, and they are strange prisoners 
Like ourselves, I replied, and they see only their own shadows, or the shadows of 
one another, which the fire throws on the opposite wall of the cave? 
True, he said, how could they see anything but the shadows if they were never 
allowed to move their heads? 
And of the objects which are being carried in like manner they would only see the 
shadows? 
Yes, he said 
And if they were able to converse with one another, would they not suppose that 
they were naming what was actually before them? 
Very true 
And suppose further that the prison had an echo which came from the other side, 
would they not be sure to fancy when one of the passers-by spoke that the voice 
which they heard came from the passing shadow? 
No question, he replied 
To them, I said, the truth would be literally nothing but the shadows of the images 
That is certain 
And now look again, and see what will naturally follow if the prisoners are 
released and disabused of their error At first, when any of them is liberated and 
compelled suddenly to stand up and turn his neck round and walk and look towards 
the light, he will suffer sharp pains, the glare will distress him, and he will be unable 
to see the realities of which in his former state he has seen the shadows, and then 
conceive someone saying to him, that what he saw before was an illusion, but that 
now, when he is approaching nearer to being and his eye is turned towards more real 
existence, he has a clearer vision, - what will be his reply? 
- will he not be 
perplexed? Will he not fancy that the shadows which he formerly saw are truer than 
the objects which are now shown to him? 
Far truer 
And if he is compelled to look straight at the light, will he not have a pain in his 
eyes which will make him turn away to take refuge in the objects of vision which he 
can see, and which he will conceive to be in reality clearer than the things which are 
now being shown to him? 
True, he said 
And suppose once more, that he is reluctantly dragged up a steep and

[PAG 147]
rugged ascent, and held fast until he is forced into the presence of the sun himself, is 
he not likely to be pained and irritated? When he approaches the light his eyes will 
be dazzled, and he will not be able to see anything at all of what are now called 
realities 
Not all in a moment, he said 
He will require to grow accustomed to the sight of the upper world And first he 
will see the shadows best, next the reflections of men and other objects in the water, 
and then the objects themselves 
Last of all he will be able to see the sun 
He will then proceed to argue that this is he who gives the season and the years, 
and is the guardian of all that is in the visible world, and in a certain way the cause 
of all things which he and his fellows have been accustomed to behold? 
And when he remembered his old habitation, and the wisdom of the den and his 
fellow-prisoners, do you not suppose that he would felicitate himself on the change, 
and pity them? 
Certainly, he would 
And if they were in the habit of conferring honours among themselves on those 
who were quickest to observe the passing shadows and to remark which of them 
went before, and which followed after, and which were together, and who were 
therefore best able to draw conclusions as to the future, do you think that he would 
care for such honours and glories, or envy the possessors of them? Would he not 
endure anything, rather than think as they do and live after their manner? 
Yes, he said, I think that he would rather suffer anything than entertain these false 
notions and live in this miserable manner 
Imagine once more, I said, such a one coming suddenly out of the sun to be 
replaced in his old situation, would he not be certain to have his eyes full of 
darkness? 
And if there were a contest, and he had to compete in measuring the shadows with 
the prisoners who had never moved out of the den, while his sight was still weak, 
and before his eyes had become steady (and the time which would be needed to 
acquire this new habit of sight might be very considerable), would he not be 
ridiculous? Men would say of him that up he went and down he came without his 
eyes,
 and if anyone tried to loose another and lead him up to the light, let them 
only catch the offender, and they would put him to death 
No question, he said 
This entire allegory, I said, you may now append, dear Glaucon, to the previous 
argument, the prison-house is the world of sight, the light of the fire is the sun, and 
you will not misapprehend me if you interpret the journey upwards to be the ascent 
of the soul into the intellectual world 
Moreover, I said, you must not wonder that those who attain to this beatific vision 
are unwilling to descend to human affairs, for their souls are ever hastening into the 
upper world where they desire to dwell 
And is there anything surprising in one who passes from divine contemplations to 
the evil state of man, misbehaving himself in a ridiculous manner? 
Anything but surprising, he replied 
Anyone who has common sense will remember that the bewilderments of

[PAG 148]
the eyes are of two kinds, and arise from two causes, either from coining out of the 
light or from going into the light, which is true of the mind's eye, quite as much as of 
the bodily eye; and he who remembers this when he sees anyone whose vision is 
perplexed and weak, will not be too ready to laugh; he will first ask whether that 
soul of man has come out of the brighter life, and is unable to see because 
unaccustomed to the dark, or having turned from darkness to the day is dazzled by 
excess of light. And he will count the one happy in his condition and state of being, 
and he will pity the other. . . .

[PAG 149]
CHAPTER 15  
Occultism and love. Love and death. Different attitudes to problems of death and 
problems of love. What is lacking in our understanding of love? Love as an everyday 
and a psychological phenomenon. Possibility of a religious understanding of love. 
The creative force of love. The negation of love. Running away from love. Love and 
mysticism. The 'miraculous' in love. Nietzsche and Edward Carpenter on love. 
There is no side of life which does not reveal to us an infinity of the new and the 
unexpected if we approach it with the knowledge that it is not exhausted by its visible 
side, that behind this visible side there lies a whole world of the 'invisible', a whole 
world of new and incomprehensible forces and relations. The knowledge of the 
existence of the invisible world is the first key to it. 
Especially many new things are revealed to us in the most mysterious aspects of our 
existence, in those aspects through which we come into direct contact with eternity - in 
Love and in Death. And in Hindu mythology Love and Death are the two faces of one 
deity. Shiva, the god of the reproductive force in nature, is at the same time the god of 
violent death, murder and destruction. His wife Parvati is the goddess of beauty, love 
and happiness, and she is also Kali or Durga - the goddess of evil, misfortune, sickness 
and death. And Shiva and Kali together are gods of wisdom, gods of the knowledge of 
good and evil. 
In the beginning of his book The Drama of Love and Death, Edward Carpenter 
defines very well our relation to those profoundly incomprehensible and mysterious 
aspects of being: 'Love and Death move through this world of ours like things apart ­
underrunning it truly, and everywhere present, yet seeming to belong to some other 
mode of existence.' And further: 
These figures. Love and Death, move through the world, like closest friends indeed, 
never far separate, and together dominating it in a kind of triumphant superiority; and 
yet like bitterest enemies, dogging each other's footsteps, undoing each other's work, 
fighting for the bodies and souls of mankind.* 
* Edward Carpenter, The Drama of Love and Death, London, George Allen, 1912.

[PAG 150]
These few words reveal the depths of the mystery which faces us, envelops 
us, creates us and destroys us. But men's relationship to the two sides of this 
mystery is not the same. Strange as it may seem, the face of death has had a 
greater attraction for the mystical imagination of men, than the face of love. 
There has always been a great urge to understand and define the hidden 
meaning of death; all religions, all creeds begin by giving man one or another 
view of death. It is impossible to build any philosophy of life without one or 
another definition of death. And a great many philosophies of life, as for 
instance the modern spiritualism, consist entirely of 'views on death', of a 
doctrine about death and life after death. (In one of his articles V. V. 
Rosanoff says that, on the whole, all religions are teachings about death.)
But the problem of love is usually accepted in modern philosophies of life 
as something given, something already understood and known. Different 
systems introduce comparatively few differences into the understanding of 
love. And, although in reality love is for us as great a mystery as death, for 
some reason we notice it much less forcibly. We have evolved a series of 
stereotyped views on love, and men meekly accept one or another of these 
stereotyped views. Art, which from its very nature should have much to say 
on the subject, pays great attention to love; love has perhaps always been and 
is the principal subject of art. But even an limits itself, on the whole, to mere 
descriptions and a psychological analysis of love, rarely touching the depths 
of love, that contact with the eternal and the infinite which it holds for man. 
In reality love is a cosmic phenomenon, in which people, mankind, are 
merely accidental; a cosmic phenomenon as little concerned with either the 
lives or the souls of men as the sun is concerned in shining so that, by its 
light, men may go about their trivial affairs and use it for their own ends. If 
men could understand this, be it only with one pan of their consciousness, a 
new world would open up before them and it would become very strange for 
them to look at life from all the usual angles.
They would understand then that love is something quite different, and of a 
different order from the small events of earthly life. 
Perhaps it is a world of special spirits which at times take possession of 
men, subjugating them, making tools of them for the accomplishment of their 
own incomprehensible aims. Maybe it is some particular region of the inner 
world, which the souls of men happen to enter at times and where, in that 
case, they live according to the laws of that world, while their bodies remain 
on earth, bound by the

[PAG 151]
laws of the terrestrial world. Perhaps it is the alchemical work of the Great 
Master, in which the souls and bodies of men play the part of elements out of 
which is evolved the philosopher's stone or the elixir of life, or some special 
electricity, necessary to someone for some mysterious purposes. 
Love, in relation to our life, is a Deity, now stern, now benevolent, but 
never submitting to us, never consenting to serve our aims. Men strive to 
subjugate love to themselves, to force it to serve their aims, both spiritual and 
material. But love cannot be subjugated to anything and it wreaks merciless 
vengeance on the puny mortals who strive to subjugate God to serve their 
own ends. It confuses all their calculations and makes them do what they have 
never expected. It forces them to serve it, to do what it wants. 
Mistaken about the origin of love, men are mistaken about its result. Both 
positivist and spiritualist morality equally admit only one possible result of 
love - children, the propagation of species. But this objective result, which 
may or may not happen, is in any case only the result of the external, 
objective side of love, of the material fact of impregnation. If one does not see 
in love anything beyond the material fact and the desire for it, this is how it 
should be. But in reality love does not in any way consist of the material fact, 
and results of love, apart from the material, may manifest themselves on quite 
a different plane. This different plane in which love operates, and the ignored, 
hidden results of love are not difficult to understand even from a strictly
positivist, scientific point of view. 
For science, studying life, as if apart from it, the purpose of love consists in 
the continuation of life. To be more exact, love is a link in the chain of facts 
which maintain the uninterrupted flow of life. And the force which mutually 
attracts the two sexes acts in the interests of the propagation of species and is 
created by the very forms of the propagation of species. But if we regard love 
from this standpoint, we shall have to admit that there is more of this force 
than is necessary. It is precisely in this that lies the key to the true essence of 
love. There is more of this force than is necessary, infinitely more. In reality,
for the purposes of the propagation of species only a small fraction of one per 
cent of this force of love inherent in humanity is utilized. Where, then, does 
the main part of the force go?
We know that nothing can disappear. If energy exists, it must pass into 
something. And if only a negligible fraction of energy goes towards the 
creation of the future by means of birth, the remaining pan must also go
towards the creation of the future, but by other means. We know in the 
physical world many instances when the direct func-

[PAG 152]
tion is fulfilled by an extremely small fraction of the energy expended, while 
the greater part of this energy seems to be uselessly wasted. But of course 
this greater part of energy does not disappear, does not vanish, but produces 
other results, quite distinct from the direct function. 
Let us take an ordinary candle. It should give light. But it gives much more 
heat than light. Light is the direct function of the candle, heat is the indirect 
function, but there is more heat than light. A candle is a furnace adapted for 
lighting. In order to give light, the candle must burn. Burning is the necessary
condition for obtaining light from a candle; burning cannot be done away
with. But this same burning produces heat. It seems, at the first glance, that 
the heat, produced by a candle, is wasted unproductively and is at times even 
superfluous, unpleasant and hindering: if a room is lighted by candles it 
becomes too hot. But the fact of the matter is that light is obtained from a 
candle only owing to its burning - the evolution of heat and the 
incandescence of the gases evolved. The same applies to love. We say that 
only an insignificant part of the energy of love goes to create progeny, the 
greater part seems to be spent by fathers and mothers on their personal 
emotions. But that is how it should be. Without this expenditure the principal 
thing could not be obtained. Only because of these, at first sight, collateral 
results of love, because of all this whirl of emotions, feelings, agitations, 
desires, thoughts, fantasies, inner creations, only because of the beauty which 
creates, can love fulfil its direct function. 
Moreover, and this perhaps is most important of all, superfluous energy is 
not in any way wasted but passed into other forms of energy. And we are 
able to trace which they are. Generally speaking, the significance of indirect 
results may often be much more important than the significance of direct 
results. And we can trace how the energy of love passes into instincts, into 
the power of ideas, into creative force on different planes of life, into images
of art, into songs, sounds, music, poetry. And we can easily imagine the same 
energy passing into intuition of a higher order, into higher consciousness 
which will open up for us a mysterious and miraculous world. 
In all living nature (and maybe even in that which we regard as dead) love 
is a force inciting creative activity in the most varied directions. 
In springtime, with the first awakening of the emotions of love, birds begin 
to sing and to build nests. Naturally, a positivist will try to find a simple 
explanation for all that; singing is to attract the females or the males and so 
on. But even a positivist will not be able to deny that there is much more of 
this singing than is necessary for 'the

[PAG 153]
propagation of species'. Of course, for a positivist 'singing' is only 'accidental', 
only a 'by-product'. But in reality this singing may be the main function of the 
given species, the meaning of its existence, the purpose which nature had in 
view in creating this species. And this singing is needed not to attract the 
females, but for some general harmony of nature we only sometimes vaguely
feel. 
Thus we see that what appears as a collateral function of love, from the 
point of view of an individual, may serve as a principal function of the 
species. 
To go on: the young birds are not there yet, there is not even a hint of them. 
Yet 'houses' are already being prepared for them. Love has evoked a thirst for 
activity. Instinct governs this thirst for activity, because it is expedient from 
the point of view of the species. At the first awakening of love - work starts. 
And one and the same desire creates both a new generation and the conditions 
in which this new generation is to live. One and the same desire awakes 
creative activity in all directions, brings about mating for the birth of the new 
generation and makes them build and create for the future generation. 
We see the same thing in men. Love is a creative force. And the creative 
force of love manifests itself not in one but in many varied directions. Perhaps 
it is precisely by this force of love, Eros, than mankind is incited to fulfil its 
main function, which we do not know and only sometimes dimly feel. 
But even without touching upon the purpose of mankind's existence, within 
the limits of what we can know, we must admit that all the creative activity of 
mankind is the outcome of love. Our whole world turns around love as its 
centre. 
Love opens up in man sides he was not aware of in himself. There is much 
in love of the stone age and also of the witches' sabbath. Many men cannot be 
pushed by anything but love to crime, to treason; only love can bring forth in 
them deeply hidden feelings which they considered long extinct in 
themselves. In love there is concealed a tremendous amount of egotism, 
vanity and self-pride. Love is a great force that tears off all masks. And 
people who run away from love, run away in order to keep their masks. 
If creation, the birth of ideas, is the light which comes from love, then this 
light comes from a great flame. In this everlasting flame, in which all 
mankind and the whole of the world are burning, all the forces of the human 
spirit and genius are developed and refined; and perhaps it is precisely from 
this flame, or with the help of it, that a new force will spring into being which 
will lead those who follow it away from the shackles of matter.

[PAG 154]
Without using any allegories it can be said that love, as the strongest of all emotions, 
reveals in the soul of man all its manifest and hidden qualities, and it can disclose those 
new qualities which now are the subject of occultism and mysticism and are so deeply 
hidden that, in most cases, men even refuse to admit the possibility of their existence. 
Voluptuousness - to all hair-shined despisers of the body a thorn and a stake - cursed 
as 'the world' by all other worldlings: for it mocketh and befooleth all teachers of 
confusion and error. 
Voluptuousness - to the rabble the slow fire whereon it roasteth; to all worm-eaten 
wood, to all stinking rags, an ever-ready oven of lust and lechery. 
Voluptuousness - to free hearts, innocent and free, the garden-joy of the earth, the 
overflowing gratefulness of the future to the present. 
Voluptuousness - sweet poison only to the withered, but a grand cordial to the 
lion-willed and a reverently stored king of wines. 
Voluptuousness - the happy prototype of a higher happiness and of the highest 
hope. For to many an one marriage is promised, and more than marriage -
To many an one that is more strange to himself than are man and woman - and 
who comprehendedeth wholly how strange are man and woman to one another?* 
I have dwelt so long on the question of the understanding of love, because it is of the 
most vital importance; for to the majority of people approaching the threshold of the 
mystery, it is precisely from this side that much becomes opened or closed and because 
for many precisely this question constitutes the greatest obstacle. 
The most important thing in love is that which is not, which is completely non­
existent from an ordinary everyday materialistic point of view. 
In this sensing of that which is not, and in the contact thus reached with the world of 
the miraculous, i.e. the truly real, lies the principal meaning of love in human life. 
It is a well-known psychological fact that at moments of very intense experience, 
great joy or great suffering, everything happening around seems to a man unreal, a 
dream. This is the beginning of the awakening of the soul. When a man begins to be 
aware, in a dream, that he is asleep and that what he sees is a dream, he awakes. In the 
same way a soul, when it begins to realize that all visible life is but a 
* F. W. Nietzsche, Thus Spake Zarathustra, 'Of The Three Evils', trs. A. Tille, 
Everyman's Library, J. M. Dent & Sons, London, 1933 and Modern Library, New 
York, 1966.

[PAG 155]
dream, approaches awakening. And the stronger, the more vivid the experiences of a 
man, the quicker may come the moment of consciousness of the unreality of life. 
It is very interesting to examine love and men's attitude to love, using the same 
method and the same analogies as those applied to the comparative study of different 
dimensions. 
We should again imagine a world of plane-beings, examining phenomena which 
come to their plane from another unknown world (such as the change of the colour of 
lines on the plane which are actually due to the rotation of a wheel with multi-coloured 
spokes passing through the plane). The plane-beings suppose that these phenomena 
originate on their plane from causes also lying on the plane, and that they also end 
there. And all similar phenomena are for them identical, such as the two circles which 
actually belong to quite different objects.* On this basis they build their theories and 
their ethics. And yet, if they were bold enough to abandon their 'two-dimensional' 
psychology and to understand the true nature of these phenomena, then with the help of 
these very phenomena and by means of them they would be able to tear themselves 
away from their plane, to rise, to soar above it and to see a vast unknown world. 
The question of love occupies exactly the same place in our life. 
Only he who is able to see far beyond the facts and who can view the facts 
themselves in the light of what is concealed behind them, only he can see the true depth 
of the question. 
Whoever is capable of seeing beyond 'facts' begins to see many new things precisely 
in love and through love. 
I shall quote here a poem in prose by Edward Carpenter (from his book Towards 
Democracy). 
The Ocean of Sex To hold in continence the great sea, the great ocean of sex, within 
one, With flux and reflux pressing on the bounds of the body, the 
beloved genitals, Vibrating, swaying emotional to the star-glint of the eyes of 
all 
human beings, 
Reflecting Heaven and all Creatures, How wonderful! 
Scarcely a figure, male or female, approaches, but a tremor travels across it. 
* See pp. 53 and 119.

[PAG 156]
As when on the cliff which bounds the edge of a pond someone 
moves, then in the bowels of the water also there is a mirrored 
movement 
So on the edge of this Ocean The glory of the human form, even faintly 
outlined under the trees 
or by the shore, convulses it with far reminiscences; 
(Yet strong and solid the sea-banks, not lightly to be overpassed;) Till 
maybe to the touch, to the approach, to the incantation of the 
eyes of one, 
It bursts forth, uncontrollable 0 
wonderful Ocean of Sex, 
Ocean of millions and millions of tiny seed-like human forms 
contained (if they be truly contained) within each person Mirrors of the 
very universe, Sacred temple and innermost shrine of each body, Ocean­
river flowing ever on through the great trunk and branches of Humanity,
From which after all the individual only springs like a leaf-bud' Ocean which 
we so wonderfully contain (if indeed we do contain 
thee), and yet who containest us! Sometimes when I feel and know thee 
within, and identify myself
with thee, Do I understand that I also am of the dateless brood of Heaven 
and 
Eternity.* 
Returning to that from which I started, to the relationship between the two 
fundamental laws of our existence, love and death, the true correlation of 
which remains for us mysterious and incomprehensible, I shall only recall the 
words by which Schopenhauer ends his Counsels and Maxims 
I should point out how Beginning and End meet together, and how closely and 
intimately Eros is connected with Death, how Orcus, or Amenthus, as the Egyptians 
called him, is not only the receiver but the giver of all things
 Death is the great 
reservoir of Life Everything comes from Orcus, - everything that is alive now was 
once there Could we but understand the great trick by which that is done, all would be 
clear'** 
* Edward Carpenter, Towards Democracy, London, George Allen & Unwin and 
New York, Folcroft, 1931 
**'Counsels and Maxims', being the second part of A Schopenhauer's 'Aphonsmen 
zur Lebensweisheit, trs T Bailey Saunders, London, Swan Sonnenshein, 1899

[PAG 157]
CHAPTER 16 
The phenomenal and the noumenal side of man 'Man in himself.' How do we know 
the inner side of man? Can we know of the existence of consciousness in conditions 
of space not analogous to ours? Brain and consciousness. Unity of the world Logical 
impossibility of a simultaneous existence of spirit and matter. Either all is spirit or all 
is matter. Rational and irrational actions in nature and in man's life. Can rational 
actions exist side by side with irrational? The world as an accidentally produced 
mechanical toy. The impossibility of consciousness in a mechanical universe. The 
impossibility of mechanicalness if consciousness exists. The fact of human 
consciousness interfering with the mechanical system. The consciousness of other 
cross-sections of the world. How can we know about them? Kant on 'spirits'. Spinoza 
on the cognition of the invisible world. Necessity for the intellectual definition of 
what is possible and what is impossible in the noumenal world 
We know very imperfectly what man is and our ideas of man are extremely 
erroneous and easily create new illusions. First of all, we are inclined to 
regard man as a certain unity, and to consider different details and functions 
of man as interconnected and all of them dependent on one another. 
Moreover, we see the cause of all man's properties and actions in his physical 
apparatus, in the visible man. In reality man is something very complex, and 
complex in many senses. Many sides of man's life are either totally 
unconnected with each other, or only connected by the fact that they belong to 
one and the same man; and man's life goes on simultaneously as it were, on 
different planes. Moreover, the phenomena of one plane touch another plane 
only partially and rarely, and may not touch it at all. And man's relations to 
the different sides of himself and of other people are not at all the same. 
Man contains in himself all the three kinds of phenomena mentioned 
earlier, i.e. he represents a combination of physical phenomena, phenomena 
of life and psychological phenomena. And the interrelation of these three 
orders of phenomena is infinitely more complex than we are accustomed to 
think. Psychological phenomena in ourselves we feel, sense and are aware of; 
phenomena of life and physical phenomena we observe and form conclusions 
about on the grounds of experience. We do not sense the psychological 
phenomena of others, i.e. the thoughts, feelings and desires of

[PAG 158]
another man. We deduce that he has got them from his words or by analogy with 
ourselves. We know that, with us, certain actions are preceded by certain thoughts and 
feelings. And so, when we observe the same actions in another man, we conclude that 
he has thought and felt as we do. Analogy with ourselves is our only criterion and 
method of judging and drawing conclusions about the psychological phenomena of 
other people, if we cannot communicate with them or refuse to believe what they tell us 
about themselves. 
Supposing I were, to live in the midst of people, without any means of 
communicating with them or drawing conclusions by analogy; I should then be 
surrounded by moving and acting automatons, the meaning, significance and causes of 
whose actions would be totally obscure for me. Perhaps I would explain their actions by 
'molecular motion', or by the 'influence of the planets', or by 'spiritualism', i.e. the 
actions of 'spirits', or by 'accident', an involuntary combination of causes; in any case I 
would not and could not see the psychological life of these people in those actions. 
Altogether, I can only judge about the existence of thought and feeling by analogy 
with myself. I know that certain phenomena in me are connected with my possessing 
thought and feeling. When I see the same phenomena in another man, I conclude that 
he also possesses thought and feeling. But I cannot have a direct proof of the existence 
of psychological life in another man. Studying man only from outside, I should be in 
relation to him in exactly the same position as, according to Kant, we stand in relation 
to the surrounding world. We only know our means of perceiving it. The world in itself 
we do not know. 
Thus I have two means of knowing a man in himself (i.e. his inner life) - analogy 
with myself and communication with him, exchange of thoughts. Without this a man 
for me is nothing but a phenomenon, a moving automaton. 
The noumenon of a man is his psychological life, all that this psychological life 
contains, and all that it connects man with. 
Both worlds are open for us in 'Man', although the noumenal world is open but 
slightly and imperfectly owing to the fact that it is perceived by us through the 
phenomenal world. 
Noumenal means perceived by the mind and the characteristic feature of the things 
belonging to the noumenal world is the fact that they cannot be perceived by the same 
method as things of the phenomenal world. We may speculate about the existence of 
things of the noumenal world, we may find them by means of mental deductions, we 
may discover them by analogy, we may feel them, enter into some

[PAG 159]
sort of communion with them - but we cannot see, hear, touch, weigh or 
measure them, we cannot photograph them or resolve them into chemical 
elements or into a number of vibrations. 
Thus psychological life with all its functions and all its content -thoughts, 
feelings, desires, will, does not belong to the world of phenomena. No 
element of psychological life can be perceived by us objectively. It is just as 
impossible to see an emotion as such, as it is impossible to see the value of a 
coin. You can see the inscription on a coin but you can never see its value. It 
is just as impossible to photograph a thought as it is to visualize 'Egyptian 
darkness' in a bottle. To think otherwise, to experiment with photographing
thoughts, simply implies inability to think logically. On a gramophone record 
there are scratches, elevations and depressions, but there are no sounds. 
Whoever will hold the gramophone record to his ear, hoping to hear some­
thing, will certainly listen in vain. 
Including in himself two worlds, i.e. the phenomenal and the noumenal 
world, 'man' offers us the possibility to understand the mutual relationship of 
these two worlds in all nature. It should be remembered, however, that in 
denning the noumenon as psychological life we take only one of the 
innumerable facets of the noumenon. 
Earlier we came to the conclusion that the noumenon of a thing consists in 
its function in another sphere, in its meaning which is incomprehensible in 
the given section of the world.* 
Further, we came to the conclusion that the number of meanings of one 
and the same thing in different sections of the world must be infinitely great
and infinitely varied, that each thing must become its own opposite, return 
again to the beginning (from our point of view) and so on and so on, 
infinitely expanding, contracting again, etc. 
And we must remember that the noumenon and the phenomenon are not 
different things, but merely different aspects of one and the same thing. 
Moreover, every phenomenon is the finite expression of 
' The expression 'section of the world' is taken as an indicator of the unreality of 
the forms of each section. The world is infinite and all forms are infinite, but to 
encompass them with the finite brain-consciousness, i.e. with the consciousness 
reflected by the brain, we must imagine infinite forms as finite - and these are the 
sections of the world. The world is one, but the number of possible sections is infinite. 
Let us imagine an apple: it is one. But it is possible to imagine an infinite number of 
sections of an apple, taken in all directions; and all these sections will differ from one 
another. If, instead of an apple, we take a more complex body, for instance, the body of 
some animal, then sections taken in different directions will be even more unlike one 
another.

[PAG 160]
something infinite within the sphere of our perception through the organs of 
sense. 
For us a phenomenon is a three-dimensional expression of the infinite. 
This three-dimensionality depends on the three-dimensional forms of our 
perception, i.e. more simply, on our brain, nerves, eyes and fingertips. 
In 'man' we have found that one side of his noumenon is his psychological 
life, that it is precisely in mind that lies the beginning of the solution of the 
riddle of those functions and inner implications of man which are 
incomprehensible from outside. 
What is man's psychological life if not his function, unknowable in the 
three-dimensional section of the world? Indeed, if we should study and 
observe man objectively, from outside, by all the means accessible to us, we 
shall never discover his psychological life or define the function of mind. We 
must first of all know about the existence of our own psychological life, then 
enter into a conversation with another man (by means of sounds, gestures, 
words), begin to exchange thoughts with him and, on the basis of his answers, 
draw the conclusion that he possesses what we do; or draw the same con­
clusion on the basis of external signs (actions identical to ours in identical 
circumstances). By direct method of objective investigation, without the help
of speech, or without the aid of deduction by analogy we shall not discover 
any psychological life in another man. That which is inaccessible to a direct 
method of investigation, and yet exists, is NOUMENAL. Consequently we shall 
not be able to determine the function and meaning of man in a section of the 
world other than the world of Euclidean geometry which is alone accessible 
to 'direct methods of investigation'. Therefore we have every right to regard
'man's mind' as his function in a section of the world different from the three­
dimensional section in which 'man's body' functions. 
Having established this, we may ask ourselves the question: have we not 
the right to draw the reverse conclusion and regard the unknown function of 
the 'world' and of 'things' outside the three-dimensional section as their own 
kind of mind? 
Our ordinary positivist view regards mind as the function of the brain. 
Without the brain we cannot imagine any mental life. 
Max Nordau, when wishing to imagine the 'world's consciousness' (in 
Paradoxes) had to say that we cannot be certain that somewhere in the 
infinite space of the universe is not repeated on a colossal scale the

[PAG 161]
same combination of physical and chemical elements as constitutes our brain This is 
very characteristic and typical of 'positivist science' Wishing to imagine the 'world's 
consciousness', positivism must first of all imagine a gigantic brain Does not this at 
once savour of the two-dimensional plane-world? In actual fact the idea of a gigantic 
brain somewhere beyond the stars shows the astonishing poverty and feebleness of 
positivist thought This thought cannot get out of the customary rut, and it has no wings 
to fly 
Imagine some inquiring inhabitant of seventeenth-century Europe trying to visualize 
the means of transportation of the twentieth century and picturing to himself an 
enormous stage-coach, the size of a large inn, drawn by a thousand horses He would be 
very near the truth . . and at the same time infinitely far from it And yet even in his 
time there were some minds which worked in the right direction; 
the idea of a steam engine was already shaping itself, models were already appearing 
The thought expressed by Nordau is reminiscent of the favourite theories of popular 
philosophy relating to an idea casually picked up, that the planets and stars of the 
visible world are merely the molecules of some great body, of which our universe is 
but an insignificant part. . . . 
'Perhaps the whole universe is contained in the little finger of some great being,' says 
a philosophizing man-in-the-street. 'And perhaps our molecules are also worlds. 
Maybe my little finger also holds several universes!' And the man-in-the-street 
becomes frightened. But all such reasonings are nothing but a gigantic stage-coach.* 
Such reasoning is similar to the reflections of a little girl about whom I once read, I 
think, in the Theosophical Review. The girl sat by the fire; beside her slept a cat. 'Here 
is the cat, asleep,' thought the little girl, 'Perhaps it is dreaming that it is not a cat but a 
little girl. And maybe I am not really a little girl at all, but a cat, and I am only 
dreaming that I am a little girl. . . .' The next moment a piercing shriek shakes the 
house and the little girl's parents have a hard time to persuade her that she is not a cat 
but truly a little girl. 
All this shows that philosophizing needs a certain skill. Our thought is surrounded 
by a great many blind alleys And positivism, 
* The error lies here not in the idea itself but in the literal analogy In itself the idea 
that molecules are worlds and worlds are molecules is absolutely correct and is worthy 
of attention and study, it may serve as a means for a right understanding of the world 
My readers will have to meet with this idea later and then they will see how much is 
contained in this idea and how much is explained by taking this idea as one's starting 
point But the same thought, enclosed in a literal analogy without the idea of the 
Unknown and the Unknowable, is destroyed and becomes a caricature

[PAG 162]
always and everywhere trying to apply the rule of three, is a blind alley in 
itself. 
Our analysis of phenomena and the relation we have established between 
physical phenomena, phenomena of life and psychological phenomena 
permits us to affirm quite definitely that psychological phenomena cannot be 
a function of physical phenomena - or phenomena of a lower order. We have 
established that the higher cannot be a function of the lower. And the division 
of the higher and the lower is also based on the perfectly real fact of the 
different potentialities of different orders of phenomena - of the different 
amount of latent force contained in them (or liberated by them). And, quite 
naturally, we have the right to label as higher those phenomena which 
possess a greater potentiality, a greater latent force, and as lower phenomena 
possessing a lesser potentiality, a lesser latent force. 
Phenomena of life are higher as compared with physical phenomena. 
Psychological phenomena are higher as compared with phenomena of life 
and physical phenomena. 
It is clear which must be the function of which. 
We cannot say without making the crudest logical mistake that life and 
mind are functionally dependent on physical phenomena, i.e. we cannot call 
them the result of physical phenomena. On the contrary, everything forces us 
to recognize physical phenomena as the result of life, and physiological life 
as the result of psychological life. 
But of what life and what mind? This is the question. Naturally it would be 
absurd to regard the earthly globe as a function of the vegetable and animal 
life proceeding on the earth, and the visible starry world as a function of the 
human mind. But nobody disputes this. The occult understanding speaks of 
another life and another mind, partial manifestations of which are our life 
and our mind. It is important to establish the general principle that physical 
phenomena, as the lower, depend on phenomena of life and mind, as the 
higher. 
If we accept this principle as established, we shall be able to proceed 
further. 
The first question which arises is: in what relation does the psychological 
life of man stand to his body and his brain? 
This question has been answered differently at different times. 
Psychological life was regarded as a direct function of the brain (Thought is a 
motion of matter'), thus, naturally, denying any possibility of thought or 
feeling without a brain. Then there were

[PAG 163]
attempts at establishing the parallelism of mental activity and the activity of 
the brain. But the character of this parallelism has always remained very
obscure. Yes, evidently the brain works parallel with thinking and feeling, a 
break-down or a disorder in the activity of the brain brings about an apparent 
break-down or a disorder in mental functions. Still, the activity of the brain is 
nothing but motion, i.e. an object phenomenon, whereas mental activity is a 
phenomenon objectively undefinable, subjective, and at the same time more 
powerful than anything objective. How to link it all together? 
Let us try to look at the activity of the brain and of the mind from the point 
of view of the existence of two data 'the world' and 'inner life', accepted by us 
in the very beginning. 
If we look at the brain from the standpoint of inner life, the brain will be a 
part of the 'world', i.e. a part of the outer world lying outside mental life. Thus 
mind and the brain are different things But our observation and experience 
tell us that the mind can operate only through the brain. The brain is that 
necessary prism passing through which a pan of the mind manifests itself to 
us as intellect. Or putting it in a slightly different way, the brain is a mirror, 
reflecting the mind in our three-dimensional section of the world. This means 
that in our three-dimensional section of the world not the whole of mind is 
seen (we do not know its real dimensions) but only as much of it as is 
reflected in the brain. It is clear that if the mirror is broken, the reflection 
must also be shattered, or, if the mirror is damaged it will give a distorted 
reflection. But there are no grounds for supposing that when the mirror breaks 
the object it reflects also becomes broken, i.e. in this case, mind. 
The mind cannot suffer from disorders of the brain, but its manifestations 
can suffer greatly and can even disappear altogether from the field of our 
observation. It is clear, therefore, that disorders in the activity of the brain 
lead to a weakening or a di