=== Tertium Organum (P. D. Ouspensky).pdf — CHUNK 16/18 ===
Chars: 43,181 | Offset: 664,659

id a premature closing of 
our account with reality. . . . 
The whole drift of my education goes to persuade me that the world of our present 
consciousness is only one of many worlds of consciousness that exist, and that those 
other worlds must contain experiences which have a meaning for our life also. . . . 
Looking back on my own experiences, they all converge towards a kind of insight 
to which I cannot help ascribing some metaphysical significance. The keynote of it 
is invariably a reconciliation. It is as if the opposites of the world, whose 
contradictoriness and conflict make all our difficulties and troubles, were melted 
into unity. Not only do they, as contrasted species, 
* The Persian Mystics, op. cit.

[PAG 265]
belong to one and the same genus, but one of the species, the nobler and better one, 
is itself the genus, and so soaks up and absorbs its opposite into itself. This is a dark 
saying, I know, when thus expressed in terms of common logic, but I cannot wholly 
escape from its authority. I feel as if it must mean something, something like what 
the Hegelian philosophy means, if one could only lay hold of it more clearly. Those 
who have ears to hear, let them hear; to me the living sense of its reality only comes 
in the artificial mystic state of mind. 
What reader of Hegel can doubt that that sense of a perfected Being with all its 
otherness soaked up into itself, which dominates his whole philosophy, must have 
come from the prominence in his consciousness of mystical moods like this, in most 
persons kept subliminal? The notion is thoroughly characteristic of the mystical 
level, and the Aufgabe of making it articulate was surely set to Hegel's intellect by 
mystical feeling. 
I just spoke of friends who believe in the anaesthetic revelation. For them too it is 
a monistic insight, in which the other in its various forms appears absorbed into the 
One. 
'Into this pervading genus,' writes one of them, 'we pass, forgetting and forgotten, 
and thenceforth each is all, in God. There is no higher, no deeper, no other, than the 
life in which we are founded. The One remains, the many change and pass; and each 
and every one of us is the one that remains. . . . This is the ultimatum. . . .As sure as 
being - whence is all our care - so sure is content, beyond duplexity, antithesis, or 
trouble, where I have triumphed in a solitude that God is not above' (B. P. Blood, 
The Anaesthetic Revelation and the Gist of Philosophy, Amsterdam, New York, 
1874). 
Xenos Clark, a philosopher, who died young at Amherst in the '8o's . . . was also 
impressed by the revelation. 
'In the first place,' he once wrote to me, 'Mr. Blood and I agree that the revelation 
is, if anything, non-emotional. ... It is, as Mr. Blood says, "the one sole and 
sufficient insight why, or not why, but how, the present is pushed on by the past, and 
sucked forward by the vacuity of the future. . . It is an initiation of the past." The 
real secret would be the formula by which the "now" keeps exfoliating out of itself, 
yet never escapes. . . . We simply fill the hole with the dirt we dug out. . . . Ordinary 
philosophy is like a hound hunting his own trail. The more he hunts the farther he 
has to go, and his nose never catches up with his heels, because it is forever ahead of 
them. So the present is already a foregone conclusion, and I am ever too late to 
understand it. But at the moment of recovery from anaesthesis, just then, before 
starting on life, I catch, so to speak, a glimpse . . . of the eternal process just in the 
act of starting. The truth is that we travel on a journey that was accomplished before 
we set out; and the real end of philosophy is accomplished, not when we arrive at, 
but when we remain in, our destination (being already there), - which may occur 
vicariously in this life when we cease our intellectual questioning. That is why there 
is a smile upon the face of the revelation, as we view it. It tells us that we are forever 
half a second too late. . . . "You could kiss your own lips" ... it says, "if you only 
knew the trick. It would be perfectly easy if they would just stay there till you got 
round to them. Why don't you manage it somehow?'" . . .

[PAG 266]
In his latest pamphlet. . . Mr. Blood describes the value of anaesthetic revelation 
for life as follows: 
The Anaesthetic Revelation is the Initiation of Man into the Immemorial Mystery 
of the Open Secret of Being, revealed as the Inevitable Vortex of Continuity. 
Inevitable is the word. Its motive is inherent - it is what has to be. It is not for any 
love or hate, nor for joy or sorrow, nor good nor ill. End, beginning, or purpose, it 
knows not of. 
'It affords no particular of the multiplicity and variety of things; but it fills 
appreciation of the historical and the sacred with a secular and intimately personal 
illumination of the nature and motive of existence. . . . 
'Although it is at first startling in its solemnity, it becomes directly such a matter 
of course - so old-fashioned . . . that it inspires exultation rather than fear, and a 
sense of safety, as identified with the aboriginal and the universal. But no words 
may express the imposing certainty of the patient that he is realizing the primordial, 
Adamic surprise of Life. 
'Repetition of the experience finds it ever the same, and as if it could not possibly 
be otherwise. The subject resumes his normal consciousness only to partially and 
fitfully remember its occurrence, and to try to formulate its baffling import, - with 
only this consolatory afterthought: 
that he has known the oldest truth, and that he has done with human theories as to 
the origin, meaning, or destiny of the race. He is beyond instruction in "spiritual 
things." 
'The lesson is one of central safety: the Kingdom is within. All days are judgment 
days: but there can be no climacteric purpose of eternity, nor any scheme of the 
whole. The astronomer abridges the row of bewildering figures by increasing his 
unit of measurement: so may we reduce the distracting multiplicity of things to the 
unity for which each of us stands. 
'This has been my moral sustenance since I have known it. In my first printed 
mention of it I declared: "The world is no more the alien terror that was taught me. 
Spuming the cloud-grimed and still sultry battlements whence so lately Jehovan 
thunders boomed, my gray gull lifts her wing against the nightfall, and takes the dim 
leagues with a fearless eye." And now, after twenty-seven years of this experience, 
the wing is grayer, but the eye is fearless still, while I renew and doubly emphasize 
that declaration. I know - as having known - the meaning of Existence: the sane 
centre of the universe - at once the wonder and the assurance of the soul - for which 
the speech of reason has as yet no name but the Anaesthetic Revelation.' 
I subjoin . . . [Professor James says] another interesting anaesthetic revelation 
communicated to me in manuscript. The subject, a gifted woman, was taking ether 
for a surgical operation. 
'I wondered if I was in prison being tortured, and why I remembered having heard 
it said that people "learn through suffering," and in view of what I was seeing, the 
inadequacy of this saying struck me so much that I said aloud, "to suffer is to learn." 
With that I became unconscious again, and my last dream immediately preceded my 
real coming to. It only lasted a few seconds and was most vivid and real to me, 
though it may not be clear in words. 
'A great Being or Power was travelling through the sky, his foot was on a

[PAG 267]
kind of lightning as a wheel is on a rail, it was his pathway. The lightning was made 
entirely of the spirits of innumerable people close to one another, and I was one of 
them. He moved in a straight line, and each part of the streak or flash came into its 
short conscious existence only that he might travel. I seemed to be directly under the 
foot of God, and I thought he was grinding his own life up out of my pain. Then I 
saw that what he had been trying with all his might to do was to change his course, 
to bend the line of lightning to which he was tied, in the direction in which he 
wanted to go. I felt my flexibility and helplessness, and knew that he would succeed. 
He bended me, turning his corner by means of my hurt, hurting me more than I had 
ever been hurt in my life, and at the acutest point of this, as he passed, I saw. 
'I understood for a moment things that I have now forgotten, things that no one 
could remember while retaining sanity. The angle was an obtuse angle, and I 
remember thinking as I woke that had he made it a right or acute angle, I should 
have suffered and "seen" still more, and should probably have died. 
'He went on and I came to. In that moment the whole of my life passed before me, 
including each little meaningless piece of distress, and I understood them. This was 
what it had all meant, this was the piece of work it had all been contributing to do. I 
did not see God's purpose, I only saw his intentness and his entire relentlessness 
towards his means. He thought no more of me than a man thinks ... of hurting a 
cartridge when he is firing. And yet, on waking, my first feeling was, and it came 
with tears, "Domine non sum digna," for I had been lifted into a position for which I 
was too small. I realized that in that half hour under ether I had served God more 
distinctly and purely than I had ever done in my life before, or than I am capable of 
desiring to do. I was the means of his achieving and revealing something, I know not 
what or to whom, and that, to the exact extent of my capacity for suffering. 
'While regaining consciousness, I wondered why, since I had gone so deep, I had 
seen nothing of what the saints call the love of God, nothing but his relentlessness. 
And then I heard an answer which I could only just catch, saying, "Knowledge and 
Love are One, and the measure is suffering" - I give the words as they came to me. 
With that I came finally to (into what seemed a dream world compared with the 
reality of what I was leaving). . . .' 
J. A. Symonds [says Professor James] also records a mystical experience with 
chloroform, as follows: 
'After the choking and stifling had passed away, I seemed at first in a state of utter 
blankness; then came flashes of intense light, alternating with blackness, and with a 
keen vision of what was going on in the room around me, but no sensation of touch. 
I thought that I was near death; 
when, suddenly, my soul became aware of God, who was manifestly dealing with 
me, handling me, so to speak, in an intense personal present reality. I felt him 
streaming in like light upon me.... I cannot describe the ecstasy I felt. Then, as I 
gradually awoke from the influence of the anaesthetic, the old sense of my relation 
to the world began to return, the new sense of my relation to God began to fade. I 
suddenly leapt to my feet on the chair where I was sitting, and shrieked out, "It is too 
horrible,"

[PAG 268]
meaning that I could not bear this disillusionment. Then I flung myself on the ground, 
and at last awoke covered with blood, calling to the two surgeons (who were 
frightened), "Why did you not kill me? Why would you not let me die?"' 
Anaesthetic states are very closely akin to those strange moments experienced by 
epileptics during their fits. Epileptic states are described with great understanding by 
Dostoyevsky in The Idiot. 
He remembered among other things that he always had one minute just before the 
epileptic fit when suddenly . . . there seemed a flash of light in his brain, and with 
extraordinary impetus all his vital forces suddenly began working at their highest 
tension. The sense of life, the consciousness of self, were multiplied ten times at these 
moments which passed like a flash of lightning. His mind and his heart were flooded 
with extraordinary light; all his uneasiness, all his doubts, all his anxieties were 
relieved at once; they were all merged in a lofty calm, full of serene, harmonious joy 
and hope. . . . 
Thinking of that moment later, when he was all right again, he often said to 
himself that all these gleams and flashes of the highest sensation of life and self­
consciousness, and therefore also of the highest form of existence, were nothing but 
disease. . . . And yet he came at last to an extremely paradoxical conclusion. 'What if 
it is disease?' he decided at last, 'What does it matter that it is an abnormal intensity, 
if the result, if the minute of sensation, remembered and analysed afterwards in 
health, turns out to be the acme of harmony and beauty, and gives a feeling, 
unknown and undivined till then, of completeness, of proportion, of reconciliation, 
and of ecstatic devotional merging in the highest synthesis of life?' These vague 
expressions seemed to him very comprehensible, though too weak. That it was 
'beauty and worship', that it really was 'the highest synthesis of life' he could not 
doubt, or even admit the possibility of doubt. . . . He was quite capable of judging of 
that when the attack was over. These moments were only an extraordinary 
quickening of self-consciousness - if the condition was to be expressed in one word ­
and at the same time of the direct sensation of existence in the most intense degree. 
Since at that second, that is at the very last conscious moment before the fit, he had 
time to say to himself clearly and consciously, 'Yes, for this moment one might give 
one's whole life!', then without doubt that moment was really worth the whole of 
life. . . . For the very thing had happened; he actually had said to himself at that 
second, that, for the infinite happiness he had felt in it, that second really might well 
be worth the whole of life. 
'At that moment,' as he told Rogozhin one day in Moscow. . . 'at that moment I 
seemed somehow to understand the extraordinary saying that there shall be no more 
time. Probably,' he added, smiling, 'this is the very second which was not long 
enough for the water to be spilt out of Mohammed's pitcher, though the epileptic 
prophet had time to gaze at all the habitations of Allah.'* 
* F. Dostoyevsky, The Idiot, trs. Constance Garnett, London, William Heinemann, 
1913.

[PAG 269]
Narcosis or epilepsy are not in the least necessary conditions of mystical 
states in ordinary people. 
'Certain aspects of nature seem to have a peculiar power of awakening such 
mystical moods,' says Professor James.* 
It would be more correct to say that this power is concealed in all aspects 
of surrounding nature. The change of the seasons — the first snow, the 
beginning of spring, summer days, rainy and warm, the smell of autumn ­
awake in us strange 'moods' which we do not understand ourselves. At times 
these moods become intensified and reach the sensation of being completely 
at one with nature. Every man has his own moments which affect him more 
powerfully than others. One is mystically affected by thunderstorm, another 
by sunrise, a third by the sea, or the forest, or rocks. The voice of sex also 
contains a great deal of this mystical sensation of nature. 
The feeling of sex places man in the most personal relationship with nature. 
The feeling of woman by man or vice versa is often compared with the 
feeling of nature. And indeed it is the same feeling which is produced by the 
forest, the steppe, the sea, mountains, only in this case it is more vivid; it 
awakens more inner voices, touches more inner strings.
A mystical sensation of nature is often produced in men by animals. 
Almost everyone has his own favourite animal, with which he has some inner 
affinity. In those animals, or through those animals, people sense nature 
intimately and personally. 
In Indian occultism there exists a belief that every man has his own 
corresponding animal, through which one can act upon him marginally, 
through which he can himself act upon others, and into which he can 
transform himself or be transformed. 
Each Indian god has his own particular animal. With Brahma it is the 
goose; with Vishnu - the eagle; with Shiva - the bull; with Indra - the 
elephant; with Kali (Durga) - the tiger; with Rama - the buffalo; with 
Ganesha - the rat; with Agni - the ram; with Kartikkeya (or Subrananyia) ­
the peacock, and with Kama (the god of love) - the parrot. 
It was the same in Greece - all Olympian deities had their own animals. 
Sacred animals played a very important part in the religion of Egypt, and 
there the cat - the most magical of animals - was regarded as sacred. 
The feeling of nature at times reveals something infinitely deep and 
* The Varieties of Religious Experience.

[PAG 270]
new in things which have seemed for a long time familiar and devoid of anything 
mystical. 
The consciousness of God's nearness came to me sometimes . . . [writes one of 
Professor James's friends, quoted by him], A presence, I might say . . . something in 
myself made me feel myself a part of something bigger than I, that was controlling. I 
felt myself one with the grass, the trees, birds, insects, everything in Nature. I exulted 
in the mere fact of existence, of being a part of it all - the drizzling rain, the shadows 
of the clouds, the tree-trunks, and so on.* 
In my own notebook of 19081 found a description of a similar state I had 
experienced. 
It was in the sea of Marmora, on a rainy winter day. In the distance, the high rocky 
shores were of all shades of violet, down to the palest, fading into grey and merging 
with the grey sky. The sea was the colour of lead, touched with silver. I remember all 
these colours. The boat was steaming north. It was rather rough. I was standing by the 
rail and looking at the waves. The white crests were running towards us from afar. A 
wave would come up, rear itself as though wanting to hurl its crest on the deck, then 
with a roar would throw itself under the ship. The ship would heel, shudder, then right 
itself slowly; but already from afar another wave was running up. I was watching this 
play of the waves with the ship and feeling the waves drawing me to themselves. It 
was not the desire to jump down which one feels in the mountains, but something 
infinitely more subtle. The waves were drawing my soul to themselves. Suddenly I 
felt it going to them. It was only a moment, maybe less than a moment. But I entered 
the waves and, with them, with a roar, attacked the ship. And at that moment I 
became all. The waves - they were myself. The violet mountains in the distance - they 
were myself. The wind - it was myself. The clouds, hurrying from the north, the rain ­
were myself. The huge ship, rolling indomitably forward - was myself. I felt that huge 
iron body as my body; 
all its movements, waverings, rollings and shudderings, the fire, the pressure of 
steam, the engine - all this was inside me. The relentless, inexorable screw which 
pushed me on and on with every turn, the rudder which never let go of me for an 
instant, watching my every movement 
- all this was I. The mate on duty on the bridge was I; and two sailors . . . and the 
black smoke, billowing from the funnel . . . everything. 
It was a moment of extraordinary liberation, joy and expansion. A second 
- and the spell was broken. It vanished as the beginning of a dream fades as soon as 
one thinks of it. But the sensation was so powerful, vivid and unusual, that I was 
afraid to move and waited for it to come back. But it did not come back, and a 
minute later I could no longer say whether it had been or not, whether I had really 
experienced all this or only thought, looking at the waves, that it might be so. 
Two years later, the yellowish waves of the Gulf of Finland and the green 
* The Varieties of Religious Experience.

[PAG 271]
sky overhead gave me a faint taste of the same sensation. But this time it 
broke off before anything materialized. 
The examples given in this chapter are far from exhausting the mystical 
experience of humanity. 
But what do we see in them? 
First of all, unity of experience. In mystical sensations all men definitely
feel something similar, something that has the same meaning and connection 
with one another. Mystics of different centuries and nations speak the same 
language and use the same words. This is the first and most important thing
which speaks for the reality of mystical experience. Next is the complete 
agreement of the results of this experience with the theoretically deduced 
conditions of the world of causes - the sensation of the unity of all, 
characteristic of mysticism; a new sense of time; the sense of infinity, joy or 
terror; the knowledge of the whole in the part; infinite life and infinite con­
sciousness. All these are real facts of sensation in mystical experience. And 
these facts are theoretically correct. They are such as they should be 
according to the deductions of the MATHEMATICS OF THE INFINITE and of 
HIGHER LOGIC. This is all that can be said about them.

[PAG 272]
CHAPTER 23  
Cosmic Consciousness of Dr Bucke. The three forms of consciousness according to 
Bucke. Simple consciousness, or the consciousness of animals. Self-consciousness, 
or the consciousness of men. Cosmic consciousness. In what is it expressed? 
Sensation, representation, concept, higher MORAL concept - creative understanding. 
Men of cosmic consciousness. The fall of Adam. The knowledge of good and evil. 
Christ and the salvation of man. Comments on Dr Bucke's book. Birth of the new 
humanity. Two races. SUPERMAN. TABLE OF THE FOUR FORMS 
OF MANIFESTATION OF CONSCIOUSNESS. 
Many people think that the fundamental problems of life are absolutely
insoluble, that mankind will never learn why or for what it is striving, why it 
is suffering, where it is going. It is considered almost indecent to raise these 
questions. One is supposed to 'take life as it comes', without thinking, or 
thinking only about those things which are capable of solution, be it only 
externally. Men have despaired of finding answers to the principal questions 
and have given up bothering about them. 
At the same time men have a very vague idea of what it is that has 
produced in them this sense of hopelessness and insolubility. Whence comes 
this feeling that about many things it is best not to think? 
Actually, we begin to feel this hopelessness only when we regard man as 
something 'finite' and complete, when we see nothing beyond man and think 
that we already know everything there is in man. In this form the problem is 
indeed hopeless. There is cold comfort in all social theories promising us 
various blessings upon earth. They leave one with a sense of frustration and 
with a bad taste in the mouth, even if one believes their promises. 
Why? What is all this for? All right, everybody will be fed. Excellent. But 
what next? 
Let us suppose - although it is very difficult, almost impossible to suppose 
- but still let us suppose that material culture, by itself, has given men well­
being. Real, unadulterated civilization and culture reign on earth! Very well, 
and what next? 
Next, some high sounding phrases about 'incredible horizons'

[PAG 273]
unfolding before science - 'communication with the planet Mars', 'chemical 
preparation of protoplasm', the 'utilization of the rotation of the earth round 
the sun' or of 'the energy contained in the atom', 'vaccine for all diseases', 
'prolongation of man's life to a hundred years', or even to a hundred and fifty!
Then, maybe, 'the artificial fabrication of human beings' - but after this 
imagination fails. 
There might still be left the possibility of digging through the earth - but 
that would be completely useless. 
And then comes the feeling of the insolubility of the fundamental questions 
about the purpose of existence, and the sense of hopelessness in face of our 
lack of understanding. 
Indeed, suppose we do dig through the earthly globe - what then? Shall we 
then dig in another direction? How tedious it all is! But positivist social 
theories, 'historical materialism' and so on, promise and can promise us 
nothing else. In order to obtain at least some kind of an answer to the 
questions which torment us we must turn in quite another direction - to the 
psychological method of study of man and humanity. And here we see to our 
surprise that the psychological method has, after all, very satisfactory answers 
to the principal questions which appear to us insoluble, and around which we 
ineffectually turn armed with the useless weapons of positivist methods. 
The psychological method gives an answer at least to the question of the 
immediate purpose of our existence. But for some reason people do not want 
to accept this answer. They insist on the answer being in a form they like, and 
refuse to accept anything not in that form. They demand the solution of the 
question of the destiny of man, but of man such as they imagine him to be, 
and they refuse to recognize the fact that man can and must become 
something quite different. In man himself there are unmanifested qualities 
which must be made manifest, and the manifestation of these qualities can 
alone create a future for man. Man cannot and must not remain as he is now. 
To think of the future of this man is as senseless as to think of the future of a 
child, thinking that he will remain a child forever. The analogy is not quite 
complete, because only a very small part of humanity is probably capable of 
growth. Still this comparison gives a correct picture of the general attitude to 
this question. And the fate of that greater part of humanity which is incapable 
of growth depends not on itself, but on the smaller pan which will grow. Only
inner growth, the development of new powers, will give man a right
understanding of himself, his ways and his future, and will enable him to 
organize life on earth. At the present time the general concept 'man' is too 
undifferentiated and

[PAG 274]
embraces completely different categories of men, those capable of 
development and those incapable of it. Moreover, a man capable of 
development already has many new qualities which are quite ready but do not 
manifest themselves, because for their manifestation they require a special 
culture, special education. The new view of humanity repudiates the idea of 
equality - which does not exist anyway - and strives to establish the signs and 
facts of the differences between men, because humanity will soon have to 
separate those who are going forward from those who are incapable of going
forward - the wheat from the tares, for the tares have become too prolific and 
are stifling the growth of the wheat. 
This is the key to the understanding of our life. And this key has been
found long ago! 
The riddle has been solved long since. But different thinkers of different 
epochs, who found solutions, expressed them in various ways, and often, not 
knowing one another, blazed the same trail with enormous difficulties, 
without suspecting the existence of their predecessors or their contemporaries 
who were treading or who had trodden the same path. 
In the world's literature there are books, usually little known, which 
accidentally (or not accidentally) may be found standing on the same shelf, in 
the same library. Then, taken together, they will give such a full and clear 
picture of the different sides of man's existence, its purposes and ways, that 
we shall no longer have any doubts about the destiny of humanity (at least of 
a small part of it), a destiny other than the sentence of hard labour of digging
through the early globe which 'positivist philosophy', 'historical materialism', 
'socialism' and so on and so forth have in store for it. 
If we feel that we do not yet know our destiny, if we still doubt and are 
afraid to part with the hopelessness of the 'positive' view of life, we do so, 
first, because we take together, without differentiation, men of totally
different categories, with a totally different future, and second, because the 
ideas we need, through which we could understand the real correlation of 
forces, have not won a place in official knowledge, do not represent any 
recognized department or branch of knowledge and are rarely to be found 
together in one book. It is very rare even to find books expressing these ideas, 
collected together. 
We fail to understand many things, because we specialize too easily and 
too drastically. Philosophy, religion, psychology, mathematics, natural 
sciences, sociology, history of culture, art - each has its own special literature. 
There is nothing embracing the whole in its entirety. Even the bridges
between separate literatures are built badly

[PAG 275]
and ineffectually, and are often altogether absent. This creation of special 
literatures is the chief evil and chief obstacle to right understanding of things. 
Each 'literature' evolves its own terminology, its own language,
incomprehensible to representatives of other literatures and not corresponding 
to any of the other languages. In this way each one limits itself still more 
drastically, dissociates itself from the others and renders its frontiers 
impassable. 
What we have needed for a long time is synthesis. 
The word Synthesis was written on the banner of the modern theosophical 
movement inaugurated by H. P. Blavatsky. But it remained only a word, 
because the real result was only new specialization and a separate
theosophical literature, tending to fence itself off still more from the general 
movement of thought. 
But there are trends of thought which strive to fight against specialization, 
not in words but in deeds. 
Books are appearing which cannot be referred to any of the accepted library
classifications, cannot be registered in any faculty. These books are the 
forerunners of a new literature, which will break down all fences built in the 
domain of thought, and will clearly show to those who wish to see it where 
they are going and where they can go. 
The names of the authors of these books are the most unexpected 
combination. I shall not undertake to give a list of authors or their books; I 
shall only point out the works of Edward Carpenter and a trend of thought
whose representative is the Canadian psychiatrist, Dr R. M. Bucke. 
Edward Carpenter, straightforwardly and without any allegories or symbols, 
formulated the thought that the existing consciousness by which modern man 
lives is only a transitory form, leading to another, a higher consciousness, 
which even now is manifesting itself in certain men, after appropriate 
preparation and training. 
This higher consciousness Edward Carpenter called cosmic consciousness. 
Carpenter travelled widely in the East, went to India and Ceylon and found 
there men - hermits and yogis - striving to achieve cosmic consciousness, and 
he holds the opinion that the way to cosmic consciousness has already been 
found in the East. 
In his book From Adam's Peak to Elephanta, in the chapters: 'A Visit to a 
Gnani and 'Consciousness without Thought', he says: 
The West seeks the individual consciousness - the enriched mind, ready 
perceptions and memories, individual hopes and fears, ambitions, loves, 
conquests - the self, the local self, in all its phases and forms - and sorely

[PAG 276]
doubts whether such a thing as an universal consciousness exists. The East seeks the 
universal consciousness, and, in those cases where its quest succeeds, individual self 
and life thin away to a mere film, and arc only the shadows cast by the glory revealed 
beyond. 
The individual consciousness takes the form of Thought, which is fluid and mobile 
like quicksilver, perpetually in a state of change and unrest, fraught with pain and 
effort; the other consciousness is not in the form of Thought. It touches, sees, hears, 
and is those things which it perceives -without motion, without change, without 
effort, without distinction of subject and object, but with a vast and incredible joy. 
The individual consciousness is specially related to the body. The organs of the 
body are in some degrees its organs. But the whole body is only as one organ to the 
cosmic consciousness. To attain this latter one must have the power of knowing one's 
self separate from the body, of passing into a state of ecstasy in fact. Without this the 
cosmic consciousness cannot be experienced.* 
All the subsequent writings of Carpenter, especially his book of free verse. Towards 
Democracy, lead to the psychology of ecstatic experiences and depict the way by which 
man advances towards this principal aim of his existence, i.e. towards new 
consciousness. 
Only the attainment of this first aim will illumine for a man the past and the future; 
it will be vision, awakening. Without this, with only the ordinary, sleep consciousness, 
a man is blind; and he cannot hope to know anything except what he can feel with his 
blind man's stick. 
The psychological picture of the awakening of the new consciousness is given by Dr 
Bucke in his book Cosmic Consciousness. 
I shall quote in an abridged form a few fragments from this book. 
I 
What is cosmic consciousness? 
Cosmic consciousness, then, is a higher form of consciousness than that possessed 
by the ordinary man. This last is self-consciousness and is that faculty upon which 
rests all of our life (both subjective and objective) which is not common to us and the 
higher animals, except that small pan of it which is derived from the few individuals 
who have had the higher consciousness above named. To make the matter clear it 
must be understood that there are three forms or grades of consciousness, (1) Simple 
consciousness, which is possessed by say the upper half of the animal kingdom. (2) 
Self-consciousness, which man has over and above the simple 
* Edward Carpenter, From Adam's Peak to Elephanta, 2nd edn, reprinted 1921, 
London, George Allen & Unwin.

[PAG 277]
consciousness, which is possessed by man as by animals.* (3) Cosmic consciousness. 
By means of simple consciousness a dog or a horse is just as conscious of things 
about him as a man is; he is also conscious of his own limbs and body and he knows 
that these are a pan of himself. By virtue of self-consciousness man is not only 
conscious of trees, rocks, waters, his own limbs and body, but he becomes conscious 
of himself as a distinct entity apart from all the rest of the universe. 
It is as good as certain that no animal can realize himself in that way. Further, by 
means of self-consciousness, man becomes capable of treating his own mental states 
as objects of consciousness. The animal is, as it were, immersed in his consciousness 
as a fish in the sea; he cannot, even in imagination, get outside of it for one moment 
so as to realize it. But man by virtue of self-consciousness can step aside, as it were, 
from himself and think: 'Yes, that thought that I had about that matter is true; I know 
it is true, and I know that I know it is true. . . .' Animals cannot think in the same 
manner . . . but if they could we should soon know it. Between two creatures living 
together, as dogs or horses and men, and each self-conscious, it would be the 
simplest matter in the world to open up communication. Even as it is ... we do enter 
into the dog's mind pretty freely - we see what is going on there. ... If he was self­
conscious we must have learned it long ago. We have not learned it and it is as good 
as certain that no dog, horse, elephant or ape ever was self-conscious. Another thing: 
on man's self-consciousness is built everything in and about us distinctly human. 
Language is the objective of which self-consciousness is the subjective. Self­
consciousness and language (two in one, for they are two halves of the same thing) 
are the sine qua non of human social life, of manners, of institutions, of industries of 
all kinds, of all arts useful and fine. If any animal possessed 
it seems certain that it would upon that master faculty build a superstructure of 
language. . . . But no animal has done this, therefore we infer that no animal has self­
consciousness. The possession of self-consciousness and language by man creates 
an enormous gap between him and the highest creature possessing simple 
consciousness merely. 
Cosmic consciousness is a third form which is as far above self-consciousness as 
is that above simple consciousness. . . . The prime characteristic of cosmic 
consciousness is, as its name implies, a consciousness of the cosmos, that is, of the 
life and order of the universe. . . . Along with the consciousness of the cosmos there 
occurs an intellectual enlightenment or illumination which alone would place the 
individual on a new plane of existence - would make him almost a member of a new 
species. To this is added a state of moral exaltation, an indescribable feeling of 
elevation, elation and joyousness, and the quickening of the moral sense, which is 
fully as striking and more important both to the individual and to the race than is the 
enhanced intellectual power. With these come, what may be called, a sense of 
immortality, a consciousness of eternal life, not a conviction that he shall have this, 
but the consciousness that he has it already. 
* In this division lies Dr Bucke's greatest mistake. Human consciousness, i.e. the 
consciousness of the overwhelming majority of men is 'simple consciousness'; 
'self-consciousness', like 'cosmic consciousness' exists only in short glimpses.

[PAG 278]
Only a personal experience of it, or a prolonged study of men who have passed into 
the new life, will enable us to realize what this actually is.... The present writer 
expects his work to be useful in two ways: first, in broadening the general view of 
human life by comprehending in our mental vision this important phase of it (which is 
hidden from us), and by enabling us to realize, in some measure, the true status of 
certain men who, down to the present, are either exalted. . . .to the rank of gods, or. . . 
are adjudged insane. The view the writer takes is that our descendants will sooner or 
later reach, as a race, the condition of cosmic consciousness, just as, long ago, our 
ancestors passed from simple to self-consciousness. He believes that this step in 
evolution is even now being made, since it is clear to him both that men with the 
faculty in question are becoming more and more common and also that as a race we 
are approaching nearer and nearer to that stage of the self-conscious mind from which 
the transition to the cosmic consciousness is effected. ... He knows that intelligent 
contact with cosmic conscious minds assists self-conscious individuals in the ascent 
to the higher plane. 
II 
Dr Bucke here expresses the view that the immediate future of humanity is 
indescribably hopeful. At the present time there stand before us three 
inevitable revolutions, the least of which will reduce to nothing all the known 
historical upheavals which were called revolutions in the past.* The first is 
the material (political) revolution, which will come to pass as the result of the 
establishment of aviation. The second is the economic and social revolution, 
which will abolish private property and will at once free the earth of two great
evils -riches and poverty. And the third is the physical revolution, which is 
dealt with here. 
Either of the first two revolutions will by itself radically change the 
conditions of human life and will raise it to a greater height. But the third will 
accomplish hundreds and thousands of times more than the first two taken 
together. And the three, operating together, will literally create a new heaven 
and a new earth. The old order of things will be finished and done with, and a 
new order will take its place.
On account of aviation national boundaries, customs tariffs and perhaps 
even the differences of language will fade away like shadows. Large cities 
will no longer have any reason for existence and will dissolve. People who 
now live in cities, will live in the mountains, or 
* See Comment No. 1, of the 'Comments on the quotations from Dr Bucke's book' 
which follow, p. 274.

[PAG 279]
by the sea, building their habitations on heights hitherto almost inaccessible, 
commanding beautiful views. In winter they will probably live in small communities. 
Both the herding together in big cities and the isolation from all cultured life of the 
agricultural worker will become things of the past. Distances will be practically 
abolished and there will be no crowding together in one spot and no enforced solitude. 
Socialism will abolish grinding labour, cruel hardships, offensive and demoralizing 
riches, poverty and all its ensuing ills. All these will become merely subjects for 
historical novels.* 
In contact with the flux of cosmic consciousness all religions known and named to­
day will be melted down. The human soul will be revolutionized. Religion will 
absolutely dominate the race. It will not depend on tradition. It will not be believed 
and disbelieved. It will not be a part of life, belonging to certain hours, times, 
occasions. It will not be in sacred books nor in the mouths of priests. It will not dwell 
in churches and meetings and forms and days. Its life will not be in prayers, hymns 
and discourses. It will not depend on special revelations, on the words of gods who 
come down to teach, nor on any bible or bibles. It will have no mission to save men 
from their sins or to secure them entrance to heaven. It will not teach a future 
immortality nor future glories, for immortality and all glory will exist in the here and 
now. The evidence of immortality will live in every heart as sight in every eye. Doubt 
of God and of eternal life will be as impossible as is now doubt of existence; the 
evidence of each will be the same. Religion will govern every minute of every day of 
all life. Churches, priests, forms, creeds, prayers, all agents, all intermediaries 
between the individual man and God will be permanently replaced by direct and 
unmistakable intercourse. Sin will no longer exist nor will salvation be desired. Men 
will not worry about death or a future, about the Kingdom of heaven, about what may 
come with and after the cessation of the life of the present body. Each soul will feel 
and know itself to be immortal, will feel and know that the entire universe with all its 
good and with all its beauty is for it and belongs to it for ever. The world peopled with 
men, possessing cosmic consciousness will be as far removed from the world of to­
day as this is from the world as it was before the advent of self-consciousness. 
III 
There is a tradition, probably very old, to the effect that the first man was innocent 
and happy until he ate of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. That 
having eaten thereof he became aware that he was naked and was ashamed. Further 
that there sin was born into the world, 
* See Comment No. 2, p. 275.