=== Tertium Organum (P. D. Ouspensky).pdf — CHUNK 6/18 ===
Chars: 43,032 | Offset: 223,522

 movement of the moon 
among the clouds and so on. 
In addition, many other movements will exist for animals which we do not 
suspect. Actually a great many objects, completely motionless for us - indeed 
all objects - must appear to animals as moving. AND IT 
IS PRECISELY IN THESE MOVEMENTS THAT THE THIRD DIMENSION OF

[PAG 95]
SOLIDS WILL BE MANIFESTED FOR THEM, i.e. THE THIRD DIMENSION OF 
SOLIDS WILL APPEAR TO THEM AS MOTION. 
Let us try to imagine how an animal perceives objects of the external world. 
Let us suppose that a large disc is placed before an animal and, beside it, a 
large sphere of the same diameter. 
Facing them directly at a certain distance, the animal will see two circles. If 
it starts walking round them, the animal will notice that the sphere remains a 
circle but the disc gradually narrows and becomes a narrow strip. As the 
animal continues to move round it, the strip begins to widen and gradually
becomes again a circle. The sphere will not change its form as the animal 
moves round it, but strange phenomena will begin to occur in it as the animal 
draws near. 
Let us try to understand how the animal will perceive the surface of the 
sphere as distinct from the surface of the disc. 
One thing is certain - it will perceive a spherical surface differently from us. 
We perceive convexity or sphericity as a property common to many surfaces. 
Owing to the nature of its mental apparatus, the animal should perceive 
sphericity as an individual property of the given sphere. What should 
sphericity look like, taken as an individual property of a given sphere?
We can say with the utmost conviction that sphericity will appear to the 
animal as a movement of the surface it sees. 
When the animal comes near to the sphere, in all probability what happens 
is something like this: the surface the animal sees springs into rapid motion; 
its centre projects forward, and all the other points begin to recede from the 
centre with a velocity proportionate to their distance from the centre (or the 
square of their distance from the centre). 
This is the way in which the animal must sense a spherical surface. 
It is reminiscent of the way we sense sound. 
At a certain distance from the sphere the animal sees it as a plane. 
Approaching it and touching some point of the sphere, it sees that the relation 
of all the other points to that point has changed as compared with what it 
should be on a plane, as if all the other points have moved, have drawn aside. 
Touching another point it again sees all the other points withdrawing from it. 
This property of the sphere will appear as its motion, as 'vibration'. And 
indeed the sphere will resemble a vibrating, undulating surface. In the same 
way any angle of a motionless object must appear as motion to the animal.

[PAG 96]
The animal can see an angle of a three-dimensional object only if it moves past it, 
and in that case the object will seem to have turned - a new side has appeared, and the 
old side has receded or moved aside. An angle will be perceived as a turning, a 
movement of the object, i.e. as something transient, temporal, i.e. as a change in the 
state of the object. Remembering the angles met with before - which the animal has 
seen as the motion of bodies - it will regard them as gone, finished, vanished, 
belonging to the past. 
Of course, the animal cannot reason thus, but it will act as though this was its 
reasoning. 
If the animal could think of phenomena (i.e. angles and curved surfaces) which have 
not yet entered its life, it would no doubt represent them to itself only in time. In other 
words, the animal could not allow them any real existence at the present moment when 
they have not yet appeared. If it could express an opinion about them, it would say that 
these angles exist as a potentiality, that they will be, but that at present they are not. 
For a horse, the comer of a house past which it runs every day, is a phenomenon 
which recurs in certain circumstances, but which still takes place only in time; it is not 
a spatial and constant property of the house. 
For the animal an angle must be a time-phenomenon, instead of being a space­
phenomenon as it is for us. 
Thus we see that the animal will perceive the properties of our third dimension as 
movements and will refer these properties to time, to the past or future, or to the 
present, i.e. to the moment of transition of the future into the past. 
This is an extremely important point and contains the key to the understanding of our 
own perception of the world; consequently we must examine it in greater detail. 
So far we have considered higher animals: a dog, a cat, a horse. Let us now take a 
lower animal - a snail for example. We know nothing about its inner life, but we may 
be sure that its perception is very different from ours. In all probability a snail's 
sensations of its surroundings are very vague. It probably feels warmth, cold, light, 
darkness, hunger, and instinctively (i.e. incited by the pleasure-pain guidance) it crawls 
towards the uneaten edge of the leaf it sits on and draws away from a dead leaf. Its 
movements are governed by pleasure-pain; it always advances towards the one and 
retreats from the other. It always moves on one line - from the unpleasant towards the

[PAG 97]
pleasant. And, in all probability, it knows and senses nothing except this line. 
This line constitutes the whole of its world. All the sensations entering from 
outside are sensed by the snail on this line of its motion. And these come to it 
out of time - from potentiality they become actuality. For a snail the whole of 
our universe exists in the future and the past, i.e. in time. Only one line exists 
in the present; all the rest lies in time. It is more than probable that a snail is 
not aware of its own movements; making efforts with its whole body it 
moves forward towards the fresh edge of the leaf, but it seems to it that the 
leaf moves towards it, coming into being at that moment, appearing out of 
time, as the morning appears to us. 
A snail is a one-dimensional being. 
Higher animals - a dog, a cat, a horse - are two-dimensional beings. To 
them space appears as a surface, a plane. Everything outside this plane lies 
for them in time. 
Thus we see that a higher animal - a two-dimensional being as compared 
to a one-dimensional — extracts one more dimension out of time. 
The world of a snail has one dimension - our second and third dimensions 
lie for it in time. 
The world of a dog has two dimensions - our third dimension lies for it in 
time. 
An animal may remember all the 'phenomena' it has observed, i.e. all the 
properties of three-dimensional bodies it has come into contact with, but it 
cannot know that that which for it is a recurring phenomenon is in reality a 
permanent property of a three-dimensional body - an angle, or curvature, or 
convexity.
This is the psychology of the perception of the world by a two-dimensional 
being.
For it a new sun will rise every day. Yesterday's sun has gone and will 
never recur again. Tomorrow's sun does not yet exist. 
Rostand failed to understand the psychology of 'Chantecler'. The cock 
could not think that he awakened the sun by his crowing. For him the sun 
does not go to sleep - it recedes into the past, vanishes, is annihilated, ceases 
to be. Tomorrow, if it comes, there will be a new sun, just as for us there is a 
new spring each year. In order to be the sun cannot wake up; it must come 
into being, be born. An animal (if it could think without losing its 
characteristic psychology) could not believe in the appearance today of the 
same sun that was there yesterday. This is human reasoning.
For an animal a new sun rises every morning, just as for us a new morning 
comes every day, a new spring every year.

[PAG 98]
An animal is incapable of understanding that the sun is one and the same, whether 
today or yesterday - EXACTLY AS WE PROBABLY CANNOT 
UNDERSTAND THAT THE MORNING IS ONE, AND THE SPRING IS ONE. 
The motion of objects which, for us, is not illusory but real, such as the motion of a 
rotating wheel or a moving carriage and so on, must, for an animal, differ greatly from 
the motion it sees in all objects which are motionless for us - that motion in the guise 
of which it sees the third dimension of bodies. This first motion (i.e. motion which is 
also real for us) must appear to it spontaneous, alive. 
And these two kinds of motion will be incommensurable for it. 
An animal will be able to measure an angle or a convex surface, although it will not 
understand its true meaning and will regard it as motion. But it will never be able to 
measure real motion, i.e. motion which is real for us. To do this it is necessary to have 
our conception of time and measure all movements in relation to some more constant 
motion, i.e. compare all movements with one. As an animal has no concepts, it will not 
be able to do this. Therefore, movements of objects which are real for us will be 
incapable of measurement, and thus incommensurable with other movements which, 
for it, are real and capable of measurement, but for us are illusory, constituting in 
reality the third dimension of bodies. 
The latter is inevitable. If an animal senses and measures as motion that which is not 
motion, it is clear that it cannot apply the same measure to that which is and that which 
is not motion. 
But this does not mean that an animal cannot know the character of movements 
proceeding in our world and conform to them. On the contrary, we see that an animal 
orientates perfectly among the movements of objects of our three-dimensional world. 
In this it is helped by instinct, i.e. capacity, evolved through hundreds of centuries of 
selection, of performing expedient actions without consciousness of purpose. And an 
animal discriminates perfectly well between movements happening round it. 
But, distinguishing between two kinds of phenomena - two kinds of motion - an 
animal is bound to explain one of them by some inner inexplicable property of objects, 
i.e. it will probably regard that kind of motion as the result of the animation of objects, 
and will regard moving objects as alive. 
A kitten plays with a ball or with its own tail because the ball or the tail runs away 
from it. 
A bear will fight with a beam until the beam throws him off the tree, because in the 
swinging beam he feels something alive and hostile.

[PAG 99]
A horse shies from a bush because the bush has suddenly turned round and 
waved a branch. 
In the latter case the bush may not have moved at all - it was the horse that 
was running. But it appeared to move, therefore it was alive. Probably 
everything that moves is alive for an animal. Why does a dog bark so 
furiously at a passing carriage? We do not quite understand it. We do not see 
how a passing carriage turns, twists and grimaces in the eyes of a dog. It is 
full of life - the wheels, the roof, the mudguards, the seats, the passengers ­
all this is moving, turning. . . . 
Now let us summarize our deductions. 
We have established that a man possesses sensations, representations and 
concepts; that higher animals possess sensations and representations, and 
lower animals only sensations. We deduced that an animal has no concepts 
mainly from the fact that it has no words, no speech. We have further 
established that, having no concepts, animals cannot comprehend the third 
dimension and only see the world as a surface. In other words they have no 
means, no instrument, for correcting their wrong sensations of the world. 
Then we found that, seeing the world as a surface, animals see on this surface 
a great many movements non-existent for us. That is, all those properties of 
bodies which we regard as the properties of their three-dimensionality, must 
appear as movements to them. Thus an angle and a spherical surface must 
appear to them as motion of the plane. Further, we came to the conclusion 
that everything which, for us, belongs to the domain of the third dimension as 
something constant, animals must regard as transient occurrences happening 
to objects - as time-phenomena. 
Thus, in all its relations to the world an animal proves to be completely
analogous to the unreal two-dimensional being which we have supposed lived 
on a plane. The whole of our world appears to an animal as a plane through 
which phenomena are passing, moving according to time or in time. 
So we can say that we have established the following: that with a certain 
limitation of the mental apparatus which perceives the external world, for a 
subject possessing such an apparatus the whole aspect and all the properties 
of the world must change. And two subjects, living side by side but 
possessing different mental apparatuses, must live in different worlds - the 
properties of the extension of the world must be quite different for them. 
Moreover, we have seen conditions - not artificial and invented but actually

[PAG 100]
existing in nature, i.e. the mental conditions of the life of animals -in which the world 
appears as a plane or even as a line. 
In other words we have established that the three-dimensional extension of the world 
depends for us on the properties of our mental apparatus; or, that the world's three­
dimensionality is not its own property, but merely the property of our perception of the 
world. 
To put it differently, the three-dimensionality of the world is the property of its 
reflection in our consciousness. 
If all this is so, it is clear that we have really proved the dependence of space on 
space-sense. And, since we have proved the existence of a space-sense lower than 
ours, by this very fact we have proved the possibility of a space-sense higher than 
ours. 
And we must admit that if a fourth unit of thinking becomes formed in us, as 
different from the concept as the concept is different from the representation, then, 
simultaneously with this, there will appear for us in the surrounding world a fourth 
characteristic which we may call geometrically a fourth direction or a fourth 
perpendicular, because this characteristic will contain properties of objects 
perpendicular to all properties known to us and not parallel to any of them. In other 
words, we shall see or feel ourselves not in a space of three, but of four dimensions, 
and the surrounding objects as well as our own bodies will reveal the general 
properties of the fourth dimension which we had not noticed before or which we had 
regarded as individual properties of objects (or their motion), just as animals regard the 
extension of objects in the third dimension as their motion. 
Having seen or felt ourselves in the world of four dimensions, we shall find that the 
world of three dimensions has not and never had any real existence, that it was a 
creation of our fantasy, a phantom, a spectre, a delusion, an optical illusion, anything 
you like, but not reality. 
All this is far from being a 'hypothesis', a supposition; it is an exact fact, as much of 
a fact as the existence of infinity. For the sake of its own existence, positivism had 
somehow to do away with infinity or at least to call it a 'hypothesis' which may or may 
not be true. But infinity is not a hypothesis; it is a fact. And just such a fact is also the 
multi-dimensionality of space and all that it implies, i.e. the unreality of everything 
three-dimensional.

[PAG 101]
CHAPTER 10  
Spatial understanding of time. Four-dimensional angles and curves in our life. Does 
motion exist in the world or not? Mechanical motion and 'life'. Biological phenomena 
as manifestations of motion proceeding in higher space. Evolution of space-sense. 
Growth of space-sense and diminution of time-sense. Translation of time-sense into 
space-sense. Handicaps presented by our concepts, our language. The need to find a 
method of expressing time-concepts spatially. Science on the fourth dimension. A 
four-dimensional body. Four-dimensional sphere. 
On the basis of all the conclusions made, we must now try to determine how 
we may see the real four-dimensional world which is screened off from us by
the illusory three-dimensional world. There are two methods by which we 
may 'see' it: either by direct sensation, with the development of 'space-sense' 
and other higher faculties of which we shall speak later, or by a mental 
understanding arrived at by an elucidation of its possible properties by means 
of reasoning.
Earlier, by abstract reasoning, we came to the conclusion that the fourth 
dimension of space must lie in time, i.e. that time is the fourth dimension of 
space. Now we have found psychological proofs of this proposition. By 
comparing the perception of the world by different orders of living beings - a 
snail, a dog and a man - we have seen how different the properties of one and 
the same world are for them -precisely those properties which are expressed 
for us in the concepts of time and space. We have seen that they must sense 
time and space differently. That which is time for a lower being (a snail),
becomes space for a being one degree higher (a dog); and the time of that 
being becomes space for a higher degree of being - a man. 
This confirms the previously advanced supposition that our idea of time is 
essentially composite and actually contains two ideas - the idea of a certain 
space and the idea of movement in that space. Or, to be more exact - contact 
with a certain space, of which we are but dimly aware, provokes in us the 
sensation of movement in that space, and all taken together, i.e. the dim 
awareness of a certain space and the sensation of movement in that space, we 
call time. 
This latter supports the thought that, instead of the idea of time having
arisen from the observation of motion existing in nature, the

[PAG 102]
actual sensation of motion and the idea of motion have arisen from the 'time-sense' we 
possess, which is nothing but an imperfect space-sense, or the boundary-line, the limit 
of space-sense. 
A snail feels the line as space, i.e. as something constant. It feels the rest of the 
world as time, i.e. as something ever-flowing. A horse feels the plane as space; it feels 
the rest of the world as time. 
We feel the infinite sphere as space; the rest of the world - that which was yesterday 
and that which will be tomorrow - we feel as time. 
In other words, every being feels as space all that is embraced by his space-sense; 
everything else is referred to time, i.e. everything imperfectly felt is referred to time. Or 
we can define it in this way: 
Every being feels as space that which, by means of his space-sense, he can represent to 
himself as being outside himself in forms; and he feels as time that which he is 
incapable of representing to himself in forms; i.e. he feels the latter as something ever­
flowing, inconstant, so unstable that no forms can represent it. 
SPACE-SENSE IS THE FACULTY OF REPRESENTATION IN FORMS. 
The 'infinite sphere' in the guise of which we represent our world, is constantly and 
unceasingly changing; at every new moment it is no longer the same as it was the 
moment before. There goes on in it a continual shifting of pictures, images, 
relationships. It is for us like a cinema screen where projections of pictures follow one 
another in a fast-flowing stream. 
But where are the pictures themselves? Where is the light that projects them on the 
screen? Where do the pictures come from and where do they go? 
If the 'infinite sphere' is the cinema screen, then our consciousness is the light. 
Penetrating through our mental apparatus, i.e. through our store of impressions (the 
pictures), it projects on the screen their reflections which we call life. 
But whence do the impressions reach us? 
From the same screen. 
In this lies the most incomprehensible aspect of life as we see it. We both create it 
and get everything from it. 
Imagine a man in an ordinary cinema theatre. Let us suppose that he knows nothing 
about the workings of a cinema, is ignorant of the existence of a projector behind his 
back and of small transparent pictures on a moving strip. Let us imagine that he wishes 
to study the cinema and starts by studying what he sees on the screen - taking

[PAG 103]
notes and photographs, observing the sequence of pictures, calculating, constructing 
hypotheses, and so on. 
To what conclusions can he come? 
Obviously to none at all until he turns his back on the screen and begins to study the 
causes of the appearance of pictures on the screen. The causes are in the projector (i.e. 
in consciousness) and in the moving strips of pictures (our menial apparatus). It is they 
that should be studied if one wishes to understand the 'cinema'. 
Positivist philosophy studies nothing but the screen and the pictures projected on it. 
Consequently the question of where the pictures come from and where they go, and 
why they come and go instead of remaining eternally the same, remains a perpetual 
riddle for it. 
But a cinema should be studied by beginning with the source of light, i.e. with 
consciousness; then one should pass on to the pictures on the moving strip, and only 
later should one study the projections. 
We have established that an animal (a horse, a cat, a dog) must perceive three­
dimensional motionless angles and curves as movements, i.e. as time-phenomena. 
The question arises: May not we also perceive as movements, i.e. as time­
phenomena, the four-dimensional angles and curves? We usually say that our 
sensations are moments of awareness of some changes taking place outside us, such as 
light, sound and so on - all 'vibrations of ether'. But what are these 'changes'? Maybe in 
reality there are no changes at all. Maybe what appears to us as movements, i.e. as 
changes, are in reality the motionless sides and angles of some kind of things existing 
outside us, things about which we know nothing. 
Maybe our consciousness, incapable of grasping these 'things' by means of sense­
organs, and representing them to itself in their entirety, as they are - and grasping only 
the separate moments of its contact with them, builds up the illusion of motion, 
imagining that something moves outside it, i.e. that it is the 'things' that move. 
If this is so, then 'motion' may in reality be a 'derivative' and arise in our mind at its 
contact with the things which it cannot wholly grasp. Imagine ourselves approaching 
an unknown town which slowly grows up, i.e. that it did not exist before. Here a belfry 
appeared which was not there before; there a river vanished, which has been visible for 
a long time. . . . Our relationship to time is exactly the same; time gradually comes as 
though arising out of nothing, and disappears into nothing.

[PAG 104]
Each thing lies for us in time and only a section of the thing lies in space. 
Transferring our consciousness from the section of a thing to those parts of it which lie 
in time, we have the illusion of the motion of the thing itself. 
We may put it like this: the sensation of motion is the consciousness of the 
transition from space to time, i.e. from a clear sense of space to an obscured one. And, 
on this basis, we can arrive at a real recognition of the fact that we perceive as 
sensations and project into the external world as phenomena the motionless angles and 
curves of the fourth dimension. 
Is it necessary or possible to assume, on this basis, that no motion of any kind exists 
in the world, that the world is static and constant and that it appears to us to be moving 
and evolving simply because we look at it through the narrow slit of our sense­
perception? 
We return once more to the question: What is the world and what is consciousness? 
But now the question of the relation of our consciousness to the world has begun to 
approach a clear formulation. 
If the world is a Great Something, possessing self-consciousness, then we are the 
rays of this consciousness, conscious of ourselves but unconscious of the whole. 
If there is no motion, if it is nothing but illusion, then we must seek further — for the 
source of this illusion. 
Phenomena of life, biological phenomena, are very similar to a passage through our 
space of some four-dimensional circles of great complexity, each consisting of a mass 
of interwoven lines. 
The life of a man or of another living being is like a complex circle. It always begins 
at one point (birth) and always ends at one point (death). We have every right to 
suppose that it is one and the same point. Circles may be large or small. But all of them 
begin and end in the same way - and they end at the point where they have begun, i.e. 
at the point of non-being from the physico-biological standpoint, or at the point of 
some different being from the psychological standpoint. 
What is a biological phenomenon, the phenomenon of life? Our science has no 
answer to this question. It is an enigma. A living organism, a living cell, living 
protoplasm contains something un-definable, which distinguishes 'living matter' from 
dead matter. We know of this something only through its functions. Of these functions, 
the chief one lacking in a dead organism, a dead cell, dead matter is - capacity of 
reproduction. 
A living organism multiplies endlessly, absorbing and subjugating dead matter. This 
capacity of continuing itself and subjugating dead

[PAG 105]
matter with its mechanical laws is the inexplicable function of 'life', showing that life is 
not merely a complex of mechanical forces as positivist philosophy tries to assert. 
This proposition - that life is not a complex of mechanical forces -is also confirmed 
by the incommensurability of the phenomena of mechanical motion with the 
phenomena of life. The phenomena of life cannot be expressed in formulae of 
mechanical energy, nor in heat calories or power units. And the phenomenon of life 
cannot be created by artificial physico-chemical means. 
If we take each individual life as a four-dimensional circle, this will explain to us 
why each circle inevitably disappears from our space. This happens because a circle 
inevitably ends at the point where it had begun. And so the 'life' of an individual being, 
having begun at birth, must end at death, which is the return to the starting point. But 
during its passage through our space, the circle emits certain lines which, by 
connecting with others, produce new circles. 
Of course, in reality all this happens quite differently; nothing is born and nothing 
dies; but this is how it appears to us, because we only see the sections of things. 
Actually, the circle of life is only a section of something, and this something 
undoubtedly exists before birth, i.e. before the appearance of the circle in our space, 
and continues to exist after death, i.e. after the disappearance of the circle from our 
field of vision. 
For our observation, life phenomena are very similar to phenomena of motion, as 
they appear to a two-dimensional being; therefore they may be 'motion in the fourth 
dimension'. 
We have seen that the two-dimensional being will regard as movements of bodies 
the three-dimensional properties of motionless solids; and as phenomena of life the 
actual movements of bodies proceeding in a higher space. 
In other words, motion which remains motion in a higher space appears to a lower 
being as a phenomenon of life, and motion which disappears in higher space, 
becoming a property of a motionless body, appears to it as mechanical motion. 
The incommensurability for us of phenomena of life and phenomena of 'motion' is 
exactly the same as the incommensurability for a two-dimensional being in his world 
of the two kinds of motion, of which only one is real and the other illusory. 
Hinton speaks of this (The Fourth Dimension): 
There is something in life not included in our conceptions of mechanical movement. 
Is this something a four-dimensional movement?

[PAG 106]
If we look at it from the broadest point of view, there is something striking in the 
fact that where life comes in there arises an entirely different set of phenomena to 
those of the inorganic world.* 
Starting from this, it is possible to presume that those phenomena which we call 
phenomena of life are motion in higher space. Phenomena which we call mechanical 
motion are phenomena of life in a space lower than ours, whereas in a higher space they 
are simply properties of motionless bodies. This means that if we take three kinds of 
existence - two-dimensional, ours and a higher one, it will prove that the 'motion' 
observed by two-dimensional beings in two-dimensional space is for us the property of 
motionless bodies; 
'life' which is observed in two-dimensional space, is motion as observed by us in our 
space. And further - movements in three-dimensional space, i.e. all our mechanical 
movements and manifestations of physical and chemical forces, such as light, sound, 
heat and so on, are only our sensations of some properties of four-dimensional bodies, 
unknowable for us; and our 'phenomena of life' are movements of bodies of a higher 
space which appear to us as birth, growth and life of living beings. If we presume a 
space not of four but of five dimensions, then in it 'phenomena of life' will probably 
prove to be properties of motionless bodies - species, varieties, families, peoples, tribes 
and so on, and possibly only 'thought phenomena' will appear as motion. 
We know that phenomena of motion or manifestations of energy are connected with an 
expenditure of time. And we see that with a gradual transition from lower to higher 
space, movements disappear, becoming translated into properties of motionless bodies. 
This means that the expenditure of time disappears, the need for time disappears. The 
two-dimensional being needs time for the explanation of the simplest phenomena - an 
angle, an incline, a cavity. We no longer need time to explain such phenomena, but we 
need it to explain phenomena of motion and physical phenomena. In a still higher space 
our phenomena of motion and physical phenomena will probably be seen, without any 
time, as properties of motionless bodies, and biological phenomena - birth, growth, 
reproduction and death, will be regarded as phenomena of motion. 
Thus we see how expansion of consciousness makes the idea of time recede. 
* C. H. Hinton, The Fourth Dimension, London, 1912, reprinted Arno Press, New 
York, 1976, p. 77.

[PAG 107]
We see how entirely conditional it is. 
We see that by time are designated the characteristics of a space higher than the 
given one, i.e. the characteristics of representations of a consciousness higher than the 
given one. 
For a one-dimensional being all the characteristics of the two-dimensional; three­
dimensional, four-dimensional and still higher space lie in time - all this is time. For a 
two-dimensional being time includes characteristics of three-dimensional, four­
dimensional and still higher space. For a man, i.e. a three-dimensional being, time 
includes characteristics of four-dimensional and higher space. 
Thus, as consciousness and forms of perception rise and expand, the characteristics 
of space increase and those of time decrease. 
In other words, the growth of space-sense proceeds at the expense of time-sense. Or 
it can be said that time-sense is an imperfect space-sense (i.e. faculty of imperfect 
representation) and that, as it becomes more perfect, it passes into space-sense, i.e. into 
the faculty of representing in forms. 
If, on the basis of all the principles we have elucidated, we try to form an idea of the 
universe, however abstract, it will quite naturally be a universe totally different from 
the one we are accustomed to represent to ourselves. In the first place, it will not 
depend on time at all. Everything in it will exist always. It will be the universe of the 
ETERNAL NOW of Indian philosophy - a universe in which there will be no before and 
no after, but only the present, known or unknown. 
Hinton feels that with the expansion of space-sense our view of the world should 
undergo a complete change, and he speaks of this in his book A New Era of Thought: 
The conception which we shall form of the universe will undoubtedly be as different 
from our present one, as the Copernican view differs from the more pleasant view of 
a wide immovable earth beneath a vast vault. Indeed, any conception of our place in 
the universe will be more agreeable than the thought of being on a spinning ball, 
kicked into space without any means of communication with any other inhabitants of 
the universe.* 
What then is the world of many dimensions, what are many-dimensional bodies, whose 
lines and sides are perceived by us as motion? 
A very great power of imagination is needed to escape, even for a brief moment, 
from the limits of our representations and to see the world mentally in other categories. 
* C. H. Hinton, A New Era of Thought, London, George Allen & Unwin, 1910, p. 
66.

[PAG 108]
Let us imagine some object, say a book, outside time and space. What 
would the latter mean? If we take a book outside time and space, it would 
mean that all the books that have ever existed, are existing or will ever exist, 
exist together, i.e. occupy the same place and exist simultaneously, forming 
as it were one book, including in itself qualities, characteristics and attributes 
of all the books that are possible in the world. When we simply say a book, 
we mean something possessing the general characteristics of all books - it is a 
concept. But the book of which we are now speaking possesses not only the 
general, but also the individual characteristics of all individual books. 
Let us take some other objects: a table, a house, a man. Let us imagine 
them outside time and space. We shall have objects possessing, each of them, 
such an infinitely great number of attributes and characteristics that the 
human mind would be utterly incapable of comprehending them. And if a 
man would wish to comprehend them with his mind, he would be forced to 
divide these objects in some way, to take them first in one sense, in one 
aspect, in one section of their being. What is 'man' outside time and space? It 
would be the whole of mankind, man as a 'species' - Homo sapiens, but at the 
same time possessing the characteristics, attributes and peculiarities of all 
individual men. It would be I, and you, and Julius Caesar, and the 
conspirators who murdered him, and the newsboy at the corner whom I pass 
every day - all the kings, all the slaves, all the saints, all the sinners - all taken 
together, fused into one indivisible being of man, similar to the great tree
which has bark, woody tissue and dead branches, green leaves, blossom and 
fruit. Can our mind understand and conceive such a being?
The idea of such a 'great being' inspired the artist or artists who created the 
Sphinx. 
What then is motion? Why do we sense it if it does not exist? 
Mabel Collins, a theosophical writer of the first period of modern 
theosophy speaks very beautifully about the latter in her poetical Story of the 
Year: 
There is no permanence in earth life, and no real meaning, except in the 
contact of personalities, and in the effort of growth. What are called events 
and circumstances and are supposed to be the realities of life are merely 
conditions which produce these contacts and allow of this growth.* 
* Mabel Collins, The Story of the Year, A Record of Feast and Ceremonies by the author of 'Light on 
the Path', London, 1895.

[PAG 109]
In these words there already sounds quite a new understanding of the real. And 
indeed the illusion of motion cannot arise out of nothing. When we travel in a railway 
carriage and trees rush past our window, outstripping one another, we know that this 
motion is only apparent, that the trees are motionless and the illusion of their motion is 
created by our own motion. 
As in these particular cases, so also in general in relation to all motion in the material 
world, the basis of which, according to the 'positivists' is the motion of the minutest 
particles of matter. While recognizing this motion as illusory, we must ask whether the 
illusion of this motion is not created by some motion inside our consciousness. 
It must be so. 
And, having established this, we must try to determine which kind of motion goes on 
inside our consciousness, i.e. what is moving and in relation to what? 
H. P. Blavatsky, in her first book Isis Unveiled touched upon the same question of 
the relation of life to time and to motion. She wrote: 
As our planet revolves once every year around the sun and at the same time turns once 
in every twenty-four hours upon its own axis, thus traversing minor circles within a 
larger one, so is the work of the smaller cyclic periods accomplished and 
recommenced, within the Great Saros. 
The revolution of the physical world, according to the ancient doctrine, is attended 
by a like revolution in the world of intellect - the spiritual evolution of the world 
proceeding in cycles, like the physical one. 
Thus we see in history a regular alternation of ebb and flow in the tide of human 
progress. The great kingdoms and empires of the world, after reaching the 
culmination of their greatness, descend again, in accordance with the same law by 
which they ascended; till, having reached the lowest point, humanity reasserts itself 
and mounts up once more, the height of its attainment being, by this law of 
ascending progression by cycles, somewhat higher than the point from which it had 
before descended. 
The division of the history of mankind into Golden, Silver, Copper and Iron Ages, 
is not a fiction. We see the same thing in the literature of peoples. An age of great 
inspiration and unconscious productiveness is invariably followed by an age of 
criticism and consciousness. The one affords material for the analyzing and critical 
intellect of the other. 
Thus, all those great characters who tower like giants in the history of mankind, 
like Buddha-Siddartha, and Jesus, in the realm of spiritual, and Alexander the 
Macedonian and Napoleon the Great, in the realm of physical conquests, were but 
reflexed images of human types which had existed ten thousand years before, in the 
preceding decimillennium, reproduced by the mysterious powers controlling the 
destinies of our world. There is no prominent character in all the annals of sacred or 
profane history whose prototype we cannot find in the half-fictitious and half-real 
traditions of bygone religions and mythologies. As the star,

[PAG 110]
glimmering at an immeasurable distance above our heads, in the boundless immensity 
of the sky, reflects itself in the smooth waters of a lake, so does the imagery of men of 
the antediluvian ages reflect itself in the periods we can embrace in an historical 
retrospect. 
'As above, so it is below. That which has been, will return again. As in 
heaven, so on earth.'* 
Everything said about a new understanding of time relations is bound to be very 
obscure. This is so because our language is entirely unadapted to a spatial expression of 
time concepts. We have not got the necessary words for it, we lack the verbal forms. 
Strictly speaking, the expression of these relations, new for us, requires some quite 
new, different forms - not verbal. The expression of new time relations needs a 
language without verbs. Completely new parts of speech are needed, an infinite number 
of new words. Until then, in our human language, we can speak of 'time' only by hints. 
The true essence of it is inexpressible for us. 
We must never forget this inexpressibility. This is the sign of truth, the sign of 
reality. That which can be expressed cannot be real. 
All systems speaking about the relation of the human soul to time -all the ideas of 
LIFE AFTER DEATH, THEORIES OF REINCARNATION, OF THE TRANSMIGRATION OF SOULS, 
all these are symbols, striving to transmit relations which cannot be expressed directly 
owing to the poverty and the weakness of our language. They should not be understood 
literally, just as one cannot understand literally artistic symbols and allegories. One 
should look for their hidden meaning, a meaning which cannot be expressed in words. 
A literal understanding of these symbolic forms in certain trends of modern 
literature, and the fact that they are being associated with the ideas of 'evolution' and 
'morality', taken in the most narrow dualistic sense, completely distorts their inner 
content and deprives them of all significance and value. 
* H. P. Blavatsky, Isis Unveiled, vol. I, J. W. Bonton, New York, 1884, reprinted 
Theosophical Publishing House, 1931.

[PAG 111]
CHAPTER 11  
Science and the problem of the fourth dimension. Paper read by Professor N. A. 
Oumoff at the Mendeleev Convention in 1911, The Characteristic Features and 
Problems of Contemporary Natural-scientific Thought'. New physics. Electro­
magnetic theory. Principles of relativity. The works of Einstein and Minkowsky. 
Simultaneous existence of the past and the future. The eternal Now. Van Manen's 
book on occult experiences. Diagram of a four-dimensional figure. 
Speaking generally about the problems of time, space and higher dimensions, 
expounded in the preceding chapters, it is impossible to avoid dwelling once more on 
the attitude of science to those problems. To many people the attitude of 'exact 
knowledge' to those questions seems a riddle; and yet they are undoubtedly the most 
important of all the questions which at present engage the attention of human thought. 
If it is important, then why does science not speak about it? And why, on the 
contrary, does science go on repeating opposite affirmations, pretending not to know, or 
not to notice, a whole series of theories and hypotheses which have been advanced? 
Science should be the investigation of the unknown. Why then does it not strive to 
investigate this unknown which has been for so long brought to its notice and which 
very soon will even cease to be unknown? 
To this one can only answer that, unfortunately, only a very small part of official 
academic science undertakes what it should, i.e. to investigate the new and the 
unknown. The greater part of it is merely instruction in what has long become 
commonplace for independent thought or, still worse, what has long become obsolete 
and discarded as useless. 
Therefore, it is especially gratifying to note that, at times, even in science one may 
detect a tendency towards a quest for new horizons of thought; in other words, that 
academic routine and an obligatory reiteration of an endless number of commonplaces 
have not always and in all cases succeeded in killing love of knowledge and the 
capacity of independent thinking. 
Although very timidly and tentatively, in some of its boldest