=== Tertium Organum (P. D. Ouspensky).pdf — CHUNK 1/18 ===
Chars: 45,000 | Offset: 0

[PAG 1]
TERTIUM ORGANUM  
THE THIRD CANON OF THOUGHT 
A KEY TO THE ENIGMAS OF THE WORLD

[PAG 2]
And sware . . . that there should be time no longer. 
Revelation 10: 6 
That ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all  
saints what is the breadth, the length, the depth and the height. 
St Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians 3: 17, 18

[PAG 3]
CONTENTS  
CHAPTER 1 
What do we know and what do we not know? Our known data 
and our unknown data. Unknown quantities taken as known 
quantities. Matter and motion. What does positivist philosophy
arrive at? Identity of the unknown quantities: x = y, y = x. 
What do we actually know? The existence of consciousness in 
us and of the world outside us. Dualism or monism? 
Subjective and objective cognition. Where do the causes of 
sensations lie? Kant's system. Time and space. Mach's 
observation. What the physicist actually works with. 
CHAPTER 2 
A new view of Kant's problem. Hinton's books. 'Space-sense' 
and its evolution. A system for developing the sense of the 
fourth dimension by means of exercises with different 
coloured cubes. The geometrical concept of space. Three 
perpendiculars. Why are there only three? Can everything 
existing be measured by three perpendiculars? Physical and 
metaphysical facts. Signs of existence. The reality of ideas. 
The insufficient evidence of the existence of matter and 
motion. Matter and motion are only logical concepts, like 
'good' and 'evil'. 
CHAPTER 3 
What can we learn about the fourth dimension by studying 
geometrical relationships within our space? What should be 
the relationship of a three-dimensional body to a four­
dimensional one? A four-dimensional body as the trace of the 
movement of a three-dimensional body in a direction not 
contained in it. A four-dimensional body as composed of an 
infinite

[PAG 4]
number of three-dimensional bodies. A three-dimensional 
body as a section of a four-dimensional one. Parts of bodies 
and whole bodies in three and in four dimensions. 
Incommensurability of a three-dimensional and a four­
dimensional body. A material atom as a section of a four­
dimensional line. 
CHAPTER 4 
In what direction may the fourth dimension lie? What is 
motion? Two kinds of movement - movement in space and 
movement in time - contained in every motion. What is time? 
Present past and future. Wundt on sense-cognition. Groping 
through life. Why we do not see the past and the future. A new 
extension in space and motion in that space. Two ideas 
contained in the concept of time. Time as the fourth dimension 
of space. Impossibility of understanding the idea of the fourth 
dimension without the idea of motion. The idea of motion and 
'time-sense'. 'Time-sense' as the limit (surface) of space sense. 
Riemann's idea of the translation of time into space in the 
fourth dimension. Hinton on the law of surfaces. 'Ether' as a 
surface. 
CHAPTER 5 
Four-dimensional space. 'Time-body' - Linga Sharira. Form of 
the human body from birth to death. Incommensurability of a 
three-dimensional and a four-dimensional body. Newton's 
fluents. Unreality of constant magnitudes in our world. Right 
and left hand in three-dimensional and a four-dimensional 
space. Differences between three-dimensional and four­
dimensional space. Not two different spaces, but two different 
modes of perception of one and the same world. 
CHAPTER 6 
Methods of investigating the problem of higher dimensions. 
Analogy between imaginary worlds of different dimensions. 
One-dimensional world on a line. 'Space' and 'time' of a one­
dimensional being. Two-dimensional world on a plane. 'Space' 
and 'time', 'ether', 'matter' and 'motion' of a two-dimensional

[PAG 5]
being. Reality and illusion on a plane. Impossibility of seeing an
'angle'. An 'angle' as motion. Incomprehensibility, for a two­
dimensional being of the functions of the objects of our world. 
Phenomena and noumena of a two-dimensional being. How 
could a plane being understand the third dimension? 
CHAPTER 7 
Impossibility of a mathematical definition of dimensions. Why
does mathematics not feel dimensions? The entirely 
conventional character of the designation of dimensions by 
powers. The possibility of representing all the powers on a line. 
Kant and Lobachevsky. The difference between non-Euclidean 
geometry and metageometry. Where should we seek the 
explanation of the three-dimensionality of the world, if Kant's 
ideas are correct? Are not the three-dimensional conditions of 
the world to be found in our perceiving apparatus, in our mind? 
CHAPTER 8 
Our perceiving apparatus. Sensation. Representation Concept.
Art as the language of the future. To what extent does the three­
dimensionality of the world depend on the properties of our 
perceiving apparatus? What could prove this dependence? 
Where could we find a real confirmation of this dependence? 
Psychology of animals. In what does it differ from the human? 
Reflex. Irritability of the cell. Instinct. Pleasure - pain. 
Emotional thinking. Absence of concepts. Language of animals. 
Logic of animals. Different levels of intelligence in animals. 
The goose, the cat, the dog and the monkey. 
CHAPTER 9 
Perception of the world by man and by animals. Illusions of 
animals and their lack of control over perceptions. A world of 
moving planes. Angles and curves as motion. Third dimension 
as motion. The two-dimensional appearance, for animals, of our 
three-dimensional world. Animals as real two-dimensional 
beings. Lower animals as one-dimensional beings.

[PAG 6]
Time and space of a snail. Time-sense as a nebulous space­
sense. Time and space of a dog. Change of the world with a 
change of the mental apparatus. Proof of Kant's problem. 
Three-dimensional world as an illusory representation. 
CHAPTER 10 
Spatial understanding of time. Four-dimensional angles and 
curves in our life. Does motion exist in the world or not? 
Mechanical motion and 'life'. Biological phenomena as 
manifestations of motion proceeding in higher space. Evolution 
of space-sense. Growth of space-sense and diminution of time­
sense. Translation of time-sense into space-sense. Handicaps 
presented by our concepts, our language. The need to find a 
method of expressing time-concepts spatially. Science on the 
fourth dimension. A four-dimensional body. Four-dimensional 
sphere. 
CHAPTER 11 
Science and the problem of the fourth dimension. Paper read 
by Professor N. A. Oumoff at the Mendeleev Convention in 
1911, 'The Characteristic Features and Problems of 
Contemporary Natural-scientific Thought*. New physics. 
Electro-magnetic theory. Principles of relativity. The works of 
Einstein and Minkowsky. Simultaneous existence of the past 
and the future. The eternal Now. Van Manen's book on occult 
experiences. Diagram of a four-dimensional figure. 
CHAPTER 12 
Analysis of phenomena. What determines for us different 
orders of phenomena? Methods and forms of the transition of 
phenomena of one order into another. Phenomena of motion. 
Phenomena of life. Phenomena of consciousness. The central 
question of our perception of the world: which kind of 
phenomena is primary and produces the others? Can motion lie 
at the beginning of everything? Laws of the transformation of 
energy. Simple transformation and the liberation of latent 
energy. Different liberating forces

[PAG 7]
of different kinds of phenomena. The force of mechanical 
energy, the force of a living cell and the force of an idea. 
Phenomena and noumena of our world. 
CHAPTER 13 
The apparent and the hidden side of life. Positivism as the 
study of the phenomenal aspect of life. What constitutes the 
'two-dimensionality' of positivist philosophy? Envisaging 
everything on one plane, in one physical sequence. Streams 
flowing under the earth. What can the study of life, as a 
phenomenon, give? The artificial world which science builds 
for itself. The non-existence, in actual fact, of completed and 
isolated phenomena. A new sense of the world. 
CHAPTER 14 
The voices of stones. The wall of a church and the wall of a 
prison. The mast of a ship and a gallows. The shadow of a 
hangman and the shadow of a saint. The soul of a hangman 
and the soul of a saint. The different combinations of 
phenomena known to us in higher space. The connectedness of 
phenomena which seem to us separate, and the difference 
between phenomena which appear to be similar. How should 
we approach the noumenal world? The understanding of things 
outside the categories of time and space. The reality of a great 
many 'figures of speech'. The occult understanding of energy. 
The letter of a Hindu occultist. Art as the cognition of the 
noumenal world. What we see and what we do not see. Plato's 
dialogue about the cave. 
CHAPTER 15 
Occultism and love. Love and death. Different attitudes to 
problems of death and problems of love. What is lacking in our 
understanding of love? Love as an everyday and a 
psychological phenomenon. Possibility of a religious 
understanding of love. The creative force of love. The negation 
of love. Running away from love. Love and mysticism. The 
'miraculous' in love. Nietzsche and Edward Carpenter on love.

[PAG 8]
CHAPTER 16 
The phenomenal and the noumenal side of man. 'Man in 
himself.' How do we know the inner side of man? Can we 
know of the existence of consciousness in conditions of space 
not analogous to ours? Brain and consciousness. Unity of the 
world. Logical impossibility of a simultaneous existence of 
spirit and matter. Either all is spirit or all is matter. Rational 
and irrational actions in nature and in man's life. Can rational 
actions exist side by side with irrational? The world as an 
accidentally produced mechanical toy. The impossibility of 
consciousness in a mechanical universe. The impossibility of 
mechanicalness if consciousness exists. The fact of human 
consciousness interfering with the mechanical system. The con­
sciousness of other cross-sections of the world. How can we 
know about them? Kant on 'spirits'. Spinoza on the cognition of 
the invisible world. Necessity for the intellectual definition of 
what is possible and what is impossible in the noumenal world. 
CHAPTER 17 
A living and intelligent universe. Different forms and lines of 
intelligence. Animated nature. Souls of stones and souls of 
trees. The soul of a forest. The human 'I' as a collective 
intelligence. Man as a complex being. 'Mankind' as a being. 
The soul of the world. The face of Mahadeva. Professor James 
on the animated world. Fechner's ideas. Zendavesta. The living 
Earth. 
CHAPTER 18 
Intelligence and life. Life and knowledge. Intellect and 
emotions. Emotion as an instrument of knowledge. The 
evolution of emotions from the standpoint of knowledge. Pure 
and impure emotions. Personal and super-personal emotions. 
The elimination of self-element as a means of approach to true 
knowledge. 'Be as little children. . . .' 'Blessed are the pure in 
heart. . . .' The value of morality from the standpoint of 
knowledge. The defects of intellectualism. 'Dreadnoughts' as 
the crown of intellectual culture. The

[PAG 9]
dangers of moralism. Moral aestheticism. Religion and art as 
organized forms of emotional knowledge. The knowledge of 
GOD and the knowledge of BEAUTY. 
CHAPTER 19 
The intellectual method. Objective knowledge. The limits of 
objective knowledge. Possibility of expanding knowledge by 
the application of the psychological method. New forms of 
knowledge. The ideas of Plotinus. Different forms of 
consciousness. Steep (potential state of consciousness). Dreams 
(consciousness enclosed within itself, reflected from itself). 
Waking consciousness (dualistic sensation of the world). 
Ecstasy ('going out of oneself). 'Turiya' (the absolute 
consciousness of all as of oneself). 'The drop absorbing the 
ocean.' 'Nirvana.' 
CHAPTER 20 
The sensation of infinity. The first test of a Neophyte. 
Intolerable sadness. Loss of everything real. What would an 
animal experience on becoming a man? Transition to a new 
logic. Our logic as based on the observation of laws of the 
phenomenal world. Its unsuitability for the study of the 
noumenal world. The need of a new logic. Analogous axioms 
in logic and mathematics. TWO MATHEMATICS. The mathematics 
of real magnitudes (infinite and variable); and mathematics of 
unreal imaginary magnitudes (finite and constant). Transfinite 
numbers - numbers lying BEYOND INFINITY. The possibility of 
different infinities. 
CHAPTER 21 
Necessity of abandoning our phenomenal logic for a noumenal 
approach. Science must recognize that only through poetry and 
mysticism do we approach the world of causes. Preparation 
through faith and love are necessary to overcome the terror of 
infinity. The real meaning of 'Poor in spirit'. The Organon of 
Aristotle, the Novum Organum of Bacon and Tertium Organum 
which, though often forgotten, existed before the others and is a 
key to the hidden side of life. Necessity of discarding our two­
dimensional 'idols'

[PAG 10]
and attempting to enumerate the properties of the world of 
causes. 
CHAPTER 22 
'Theosophy' of Max Müller. Ancient India. Philosophy of the 
Vedânta. Tat tvam asi. Perception by expanded consciousness 
as a reality. Mysticism of different ages and peoples. Similarity 
of experiences. Tertium Organum as a key to mysticism. Signs
of the noumenal world. Treatise of Plotinus. 'On Intelligible
Beauty' as a system of higher logic which is not understood. 
Illumination of Jacob Boehme. 'A harp of many strings, of 
which each string is a separate instrument, while the whole is 
only one harp.' Mysticism of the Philokalia, St Avva Dorotheus 
and others. Clement of Alexandria. Lao-Tzu and Chuang-Tzu. 
Light on the Path and The Voice of the Silence. Mohammedan 
mystics. Poetry of the Sufis. Mystical states under narcotics. 
The Anaesthetic Revelation. Professor James's experiments. 
Dostoyevsky on 'time' (The Idiot). Influence of nature on the 
soul of man. 
CHAPTER 23 
Cosmic Consciousness of Dr Bucke. The three forms of 
consciousness according to Bucke. Simple consciousness, or 
the consciousness of animals. Self-consciousness, or the 
consciousness of men. Cosmic consciousness. In what is it 
expressed? Sensation, representation, concept, higher MORAL 
concept -creative understanding. Men of cosmic consciousness. 
The fall of Adam. The knowledge of good and evil. Christ and 
the salvation of man. Comments on Dr Bucke's book. Birth of 
the new humanity. Two races. 
SUPERMAN. TABLE OF THE FOUR FORMS OF 
MANIFESTATION OF CONSCIOUSNESS. 
CONCLUSION

[PAG 11]
FOREWORD  
Tertium Organum, the first of Ouspensky's major works, was originally 
published in 1912 in St. Petersburg, and a second revised edition appeared
four years later in Petrograd. Nicholas Bessaraboff brought a copy of the 
second edition with him when he emigrated to the United States before the 
Russian Revolution of March 1917. The book was translated into English by
Nicholas Bessaraboff and Claude Bragdon and published by Bragdon's 
Manas Press in 1920. At that time no one in the United States knew whether 
Ouspensky had survived the First World War, the Russian Revolution of 
March 1917, or the Bolshevik seizure of power later that year. In fact, 
Ouspensky had decided to leave Russia for a neutral country in 1916, but 
instead he travelled south to join Gurdjieff for a while. In 1920 Ouspensky 
made his way from Ekaterinodar and Rostov-on-Don to Odessa and thence to 
Constantinople, where he received the news that Tertium Organum had been 
translated into English and published in America by Bessaraboff and 
Bragdon. On his way back to Russia from India and Ceylon in the autumn of 
1914 after the outbreak of the First World War, his roundabout route had 
taken him first to London where he had made arrangements for the 
publication of his books when the war was over. But six years later when he 
found that Tertium Organum had already been translated and published in the 
United States, he accepted the situation and wrote a preface for the second 
American edition published by Alfred A. Knopf lnc. in 1922. 
In August 1921 Ouspensky moved to London and for the next twenty years
worked with a number of his students on the English translations of A New 
Model of the Universe, Fragments of an Unknown Teaching (the working
title of In Search of the Miraculous), Strange Life of Ivan Osokin and Tertium 
Organum. The translation of Tertium Organum was undertaken by Madame 
E. Kadloubovsky, from the second Russian edition, and a substantial part was 
approved by the author. In 1947, at the time of his death, the translation was 
incomplete but Mme Kadloubovsky decided to finish it, having already
received careful directions from the author. The new translation was first 
lithographed in Cape Town, South Africa, in an edition of only twenty-one 
copies by Fairfax Hall at his private press, the Stourton Press. Later in 1961, 
an abridged version was hand-set -

[PAG 12]
with the help of students interested in Ouspensky's ideas - in the ten-point 
type designed for the press by Eric Gill. Neither this edition of one hundred 
copies nor the earlier edition were offered for sale. 
The continued interest in Ouspensky's work was demonstrated in 1978 by
the establishment of the P. D. Ouspensky Memorial Collection in the 
Archives and Manuscripts Department of Yale University Library, and it was 
felt that this was therefore a timely moment to offer the complete revised 
translation to the general public.

[PAG 13]
CHAPTER 1  
What do we know and what do we not know? Our known data and our unknown data. 
Unknown quantities taken as known quantities. Matter and motion. What does 
positivist philosophy arrive at? Identity of the unknown quantities: x = y, y = x. What 
do we actually know? The existence of consciousness in us and of the world outside 
us. Dualism or monism? Subjective and objective cognition. Where do the causes of 
sensations lie? Kant's system. Time and space. Mach's observation. What the physicist 
actually works with. 
Learn to discern the real from the false. 
The Voice of the Silence, H.P.B. 
The most difficult thing is to know what we do know and what we do not 
know. 
Therefore, if we wish to know something, we must first of all establish 
what we accept as data, and what we consider requires definition and proof, 
that is, we must determine what we know already, and what we wish to know. 
In relation to our cognition of the world and of ourselves the conditions 
would be ideal if it were possible to accept nothing as data and regard
everything as requiring definition and proof. In other words, it would be best 
to assume that we know nothing, and take this as our starting point. 
Unfortunately, however, it is impossible to create such conditions. 
Something has to be laid down as a foundation, something must be accepted 
as known; otherwise we shall be constantly forced to define one unknown by 
means of another. 
On the other hand, we must be chary of accepting as known - as data ­
things that, actually, are completely unknown and merely presupposed - the 
sought for. We have to be careful not to find ourselves in the position 
occupied by positivist philosophy in the nineteenth century. For a long time 
the basis of this philosophy was the recognition of the existence of matter 
(materialism); and later, of energy, i.e. force or motion (energetics), although
in actual fact matter and motion always remained the unknown quantities, x 
and y, and were always denned by means of one another.

[PAG 14]
It is perfectly clear that it is impossible to accept the thing sought for as the 
thing known; and that we cannot define one unknown by means of another 
unknown. The result is nothing but the identity of two unknowns: x = y, y = 
x. 
It is precisely this identity of unknown quantities which represents the 
ultimate conclusion arrived at by positivist philosophy.
Matter is that in which the changes called motion take place: and motion 
is those changes which take place in matter. 
What then do we know? 
We know that, from the very first step towards cognition, a man is struck 
by two obvious facts: The existence of the world in which he lives', and the 
existence of consciousness in himself. 
Neither the one nor the other can he prove or disprove, but both of them are 
facts for him, they are reality.
One may speculate about the mutual relationship of these two facts. One 
may attempt to reduce them to one, that is, to regard the psychological or 
inner world as a part, or a function, or a reflection of the outer world, or look 
upon the outer world as a part, or a function, or a reflection of the inner 
world. But this would mean a digression from facts, and all such concepts 
would not be self-evident for an ordinary, non-speculative view of the world 
and of oneself. On the contrary, the only fact that remains self-evident is the 
antithesis of our inner life and the external world. 
Later, we shall return to this fundamental proposition. But meanwhile we 
have no grounds for arguing against the obvious fact of our own existence ­
that is, the existence of our inner life - and the existence of the external world 
in which we live. This, therefore, we must accept as data. 
But this is all we have the right to accept as data. All the rest requires proof 
of its existence and definition on the basis of these two data we already 
possess. 
Space with its extension; time, with the idea of before, now and after; 
quantity, mass, materiality; number, equality, inequality; 
identity and difference; cause and effect; ether, atoms, electrons, energy, life, 
death - all that is laid down as the basis of our usual knowledge, all these, are 
unknown quantities. 
The direct outcome of these two fundamental data - the existence in us of a 
psychological life, i.e. sensations, representations, concepts, thinking, feeling,
desires and so on, and the existence of the world outside us - is a division of 
everything we know into subjective and objective, a division perfectly clear to 
our ordinary perception.

[PAG 15]
Everything we take to be the properties of the world, we call objective, and 
everything we take as properties of our inner life, we call subjective. 
The 'subjective world' we perceive directly; it is in us; we are one with it. 
The 'objective world' we represent to ourselves as existing outside of us, 
apart from us as it were, and we take it to be exactly or approximately such as 
we see it. We and it are different things. It seems to us that if we close our 
eyes, the objective world will continue to exist, just as we saw it, and that, if 
our inner life, our subjective world, were to disappear, the objective world 
would go on existing as it existed when we, with our subjective world, were 
not there. 
Our relation to the objective world is most clearly denned by the fact that 
we perceive it as existing in time and in space and cannot perceive it or 
represent it to ourselves apart from these conditions. Usually, we say that the 
objective world consists of things and phenomena, i.e. of things and of 
changes in the state of things. A phenomenon exists for us in time, a thing
exists in space. 
But such a division of the world into subjective and objective does not 
satisfy us.
By means of reasoning we can establish that, actually, we only know our 
own sensations, representations and concepts, and that we perceive the 
objective world by projecting outside of ourselves the presumed causes of our 
sensations. 
Further, we find that our cognition of both the subjective and the objective 
world may be true or false, correct or incorrect. 
The criterion for determining the correctness or incorrectness of our 
cognition of the subjective world is the form of relationship of one sensation 
to others, and the force and character of the sensation itself. In other words, 
the correctness of one sensation is verified by comparing it with another of 
which we are more sure, or by the intensity and the taste of a given sensation. 
The criterion for determining the correctness or incorrectness of our 
cognition of the objective world is exactly the same. It seems to us that we 
define things and phenomena of the objective world by means of comparing
them one with another; and we imagine that we discover the laws of their 
existence apart from ourselves and our cognition of them. But this is an 
illusion. We know nothing about things separately from ourselves', and we 
have no means of verifying the correctness or incorrectness of our cognition 
of the objective world apart from sensations.

[PAG 16]
Since the remotest antiquity, the question of our relation to the true causes of our 
sensations has been the main subject of philosophical research. Men have always felt 
that they must find some solution of this question, some answer to it. These answers 
alternated between two poles, between a complete denial of the causes themselves, and 
the assertion that the causes of sensations lie in ourselves and not in anything external ­
and the admission that we know these causes, that they are contained in the phenomena 
of the external world, that these very phenomena constitute the causes of sensations, 
and that the cause of observable phenomena themselves lies in the movement of 'atoms' 
and the vibrations of 'ether'. It was presumed that the only reason why we are unable to 
observe these movements and vibrations is because we are lacking in sufficiently 
powerful instruments, but that when such instruments become available we shall be 
able to see the movement of atoms as clearly as, through powerful telescopes, we now 
see stars whose very existence had never even been supposed. 
In contemporary knowledge, a central position in this problem of the causes of 
sensations is occupied by Kant's system, which does not share either of these extreme 
views and holds a place midway between them. Kant established that our sensations 
must have causes in the external world, but that we are unable, and shall never be able, 
to perceive these causes by sensory means, i.e. by the means which serve us to perceive 
phenomena. 
Kant established the fact that everything perceived by the senses is perceived in time 
and space, and that outside of time and space we can perceive nothing through the 
senses, that time and space are the necessary conditions of sensory perception (i.e. 
perception by means of sense-organs). And, above all, he established the fact that 
extension in space and existence in time are not properties of things - inherent in them ­
but merely properties of our sense-perception. This means that, in reality, apart from 
our sensory perception of them, things exist independently of time and space; but we 
can never sense them outside of time and space, and the very fact of perceiving things 
and phenomena through the senses imposes on them the conditions of time and space, 
since this is our form of representation. 
Thus, by determining everything we know through our senses in terms of space and 
time, they themselves are only forms of our perception, categories of our reason, the 
prism through which we look at the world. In other words, space and time are not 
properties of the world, but merely properties of our perception of the world by means 
of sense-organs. Consequently, the world, taken apart from

[PAG 17]
our perception of it, has neither extension in space nor existence in time. It is 
we who invest it with these properties when we sense and perceive it. 
The representations of space and time arise in our mind on its contact with 
the external world through the sense-organs, and they do not exist in the 
external world apart from our contact with it. 
Space and time are categories of our reason, i.e. properties which we 
ascribe to the external world. They are only signposts, landmarks put up by 
ourselves, for without them we cannot visualize the external world. They are 
graphs by means of which we depict the world to ourselves. Projecting 
outside of ourselves the causes of our sensations, we build up these causes in 
space, and visualize continuous reality in the form of a series of consecutive 
moments of time. We need this because a thing that has no extension in 
space, does not occupy a certain part of space, and does not exist for a certain 
length of time, does not exist for us at all. This means that a thing without 
space, not placed in space, not taken in the category of space, will not differ 
in any way from another thing; it will occupy the same place as that other 
thing, will merge into it. In the same way, all phenomena taken without time, 
i.e. not placed in time, not taken in one or another position from the 
standpoint of before, now and after, will happen for us simultaneously, 
blending with one another, as it were, and our weak reason will be unable to 
disentangle the infinite variety of one moment. 
Therefore, our consciousness segregates separate groups out of the chaos of 
impressions, and we build, in space and time, representations of objects
which correspond to these groups of impressions. 
We have got to divide things somehow, and we divide them according to 
categories of space and time. 
But we must remember that these divisions exist only in us, in our 
perception of things, and not in the things themselves. We must not forget 
that we neither know the true interrelation of things nor do we know real 
things. All we know is their phantoms, their shadows, and we do not know 
what relationship actually exists between them. At the same time we know 
quite definitely that our division of things according to time and space in no 
way corresponds to the division of things in themselves taken independently 
of our perception of them; 
and we also know quite definitely that if some sort of division does exist 
between things in themselves, it can in no case be a division in terms of time 
and space, as we usually understand these terms, because such a division is 
not a property of the things but only of our perception of things acquired 
through the sense-organs. Moreover,

[PAG 18]
we do not know if it is even possible to distinguish those divisions which we 
see, i.e. divisions according to space and time, when things are looked at, not 
from the human point of view, not through human eyes. In other words, we 
do not know whether, for a differently constituted organism, our world 
would not present an entirely different picture. 
We cannot picture things outside the categories of space and time, but we 
constantly think of them outside of time and space. 
When we say 'this table', we picture the table to ourselves in time and 
space. But when we say 'an object made of wood', without meaning any
definite object, but speaking generally, it refers to all objects made of wood, 
throughout the world and at all ages. An imaginative person might take it 
that we speak of some great object made of wood, composed of all wooden 
things that have ever existed anywhere and which represent, as it were, its 
atoms. 
Although we do not give a very clear account of this to ourselves, 
generally, we think in time and space only by representations; but when we 
think in concepts, we already think outside of time and space. 
Kant called his view critical idealism, to distinguish it from dogmatic 
idealism, as presented by Berkeley. 
According to dogmatic idealism, the whole world - all things, i.e. the true 
causes of sensations, have no existence except in our knowledge - they exist 
only in as far as we know them. The whole world as we represent it is only a 
reflection of ourselves. 
Kant's idealism recognizes the existence of a world of causes outside of us, 
but asserts that we cannot perceive this world through sense-perception, and 
that, in general, everything we see is our own creation, the 'product of the 
perceiving subject'. 
Thus, according to Kant, everything we find in objects is put into them by 
ourselves. We do not know what the world is like independently of 
ourselves. Moreover, our conception of things has nothing in common with 
the things as they are in themselves, apart from us. And, most important of 
all, our ignorance of things in themselves is due not to our insufficient 
knowledge, but to the fact that we are totally unable to have a correct 
knowledge of the world by means of sense-perception. To put it differently, 
it is incorrect to say that, as yet, we know but little, but later we shall know 
more and, in the end, shall arrive at a right understanding of the world; it is 
incorrect because our experimental knowledge is not a hazy representation of 
the real world; it is a very vivid representation of an entirely

[PAG 19]
unreal world, arising around us at the moment of our contact with the world of true 
causes, which we cannot reach because we have lost our way in the unreal 'material* 
world. Thus, the expansion of objective knowledge brings us no nearer to the cognition 
of things in themselves or of the true causes. 
In A Critique of Pure Reason Kant says: 
Nothing which is intuited in space is a thing in itself, and space is not a form which 
belongs as a property to things; but objects are quite unknown to us in themselves, 
and what we call outward objects arc nothing else but mere representations of our 
sensibility, whose form is space, but whose real correlate, the thing in itself, is not 
known by means of these representations, nor ever can be, but respecting which, in 
experience, no inquiry is ever made. . . . 
The things which we intuit are not in themselves the same as our representations 
of them in intuition, nor are their relations in themselves so constituted as they 
appear to us; and if we take away the subject, or even only the subjective 
constitution of our senses in general, then not only the nature and relations of objects 
in space and time, but even space and time themselves disappear. . . . 
What may be the nature of objects considered as things in themselves and without 
reference to the receptivity of our sensibility is quite unknown to us. We know 
nothing more than our mode of perceiving them. . . . Supposing that we should carry 
our empirical intuition [sensory perception] even to the very highest degree of 
clearness, we should not thereby advance one step nearer to the knowledge of the 
constitution of objects as things in themselves. . . . 
To say, then, that all our sensibility is nothing but the confused representation of 
things containing exclusively that which belongs to them as things in themselves, 
and this under an accumulation of characteristic marks and partial representations 
which we cannot distinguish in consciousness, is a falsification of the conception of 
sensibility and phenomenization, which renders our whole doctrine thereof empty 
and useless. 
The difference between a confused and a clear representation is merely logical and 
has nothing to do with content.* 
Kant's propositions still remain in practically the same form in which he left them. In 
spite of the profusion of new philosophical systems which appeared in the course of the 
nineteenth century, and notwithstanding the great number of philosophers who 
specially concerned themselves with commenting on and interpreting Kant's writings, 
his main propositions have remained entirely undeveloped, mainly because most 
people do not know how to read Kant and they 
* Immanuel Kant, A Critique of Pure Reason, trans. J. M. D. Meiklejohn, 
London, George Bell & Sons, 1878, pp. 28, 35, 36.

[PAG 20]
concentrate on the unimportant and non-essential, missing the important and 
the essential. 
Yet, in actual fact, Kant has merely put forward a question, thrown to the 
world a problem which has to be solved, without indicating the way to the
solution. 
This fact is usually overlooked when people speak of Kant. Kant put
forward the riddle, but gave no solution of it. 
And to this day we repeat Kant's propositions, regarding them as 
incontrovertible but actually, we have only a very vague idea of what they 
mean. Nor are they connected with other spheres of our knowledge. The 
whole of our positive science - physics, chemistry and biology - is based on 
hypotheses contradictory to Kant's propositions. 
We do not know in what manner we ourselves impose upon the world the 
properties of space, i.e. extension; and we do not know in what manner the 
world - earth, sea, trees, people - could not possess this extension. 
We do not know how we can see and measure this extension if it does not 
exist, or what the world can be like if it has no extension. 
Does the world really exist? Or, as a logical deduction from Kant's ideas, 
should we accept Berkeley's idea and deny the very existence of the world 
except in our imagination? 
Positivist philosophy adopts a very strange attitude to Kant's views. It both 
accepts and does not accept them. To be more exact, it accepts them as 
correct in relation to the direct experience of the sense-organs, in relation to 
what we see, hear, touch. That is, positivist philosophy recognizes the 
subjective character of our perception and admits that everything we perceive
in objects is imposed on them by ourselves. But this is only in relation to the 
direct experience of sense-organs. 
As regards 'scientific experience', where precise instruments and 
calculations are used, positivist philosophy appears to consider Kant's view 
erroneous and assumes that 'scientific experience' acquaints us with the very 
substance of things, with the true causes of our sensations, or if it does not yet 
do so, it brings us closer to this acquaintance and may succeed in doing so 
later. 
Contrary to Kant, the 'positivists' are convinced that 'a more clear 
knowledge of phenomena acquaints them with things in themselves'. They 
suppose that, by regarding physical phenomena as movements of ether, or of 
electrons, or as electrical or magnetic influences, and by calculating these 
movements, they become acquainted with the very essence of things, i.e. with 
the causes of all phenomena. They believe

[PAG 21]
in the very thing the possibility of which Kant denied, namely in the comprehension of 
the true essence of things through the study of phenomena. Moreover, many physicists 
do not even consider it necessary to know Kant, and they would be unable to define 
exactly in what relation they stand in regard to him. Yet, one may not know Kant but 
one cannot ignore him. Every description of a physical phenomenon, by its every word, 
refers in one or another way to the problem raised by Kant and stands in one or another 
relationship to it. 
Generally speaking, the position of 'science' as regards the question of the limits of 
the subjectively imposed or the objectively perceived is more than precarious, and in 
order to draw its conclusions 'science' is forced to accept a great many purely 
hypothetical propositions as known and unquestionable data, requiring no proof. 
In addition, physicists overlook one very interesting consideration advanced by 
Mach in his book Contributions to the Analysis of the Sensations: 
In the investigation of purely physical processes we generally employ concepts of so 
abstract a character that as a rule we think only cursorily, or not at all, of the 
sensations that lie at their base. ... [At the basis of all purely physical definitions lies] 
an almost unending series of simple sensory observations (sensations), particularly if 
we take into consideration the observations that assure the adjustment of the 
apparatus, which may have been performed in part long before the actual experiment. 
Now it can easily happen to the physicist who does not study the psychology of his 
operations, that he does not (to reverse a well known saying) see the trees for the 
wood, that he slurs over the sensory elements at the foundation of his work. . . . 
Psychological analysis has taught us that this is not surprising, since the physicist 
deals with sensations in all his work.* 
Here Mach draws attention to a very important side of cognition. Physicists do not 
consider it necessary to know psychology or to take it into account in their conclusions. 
But when they are more or less acquainted with psychology, with that part of it 
which deals with the forms of perception, and when they take it into account, there 
results in them a most fantastic cleavage of opinions as in a man of orthodox beliefs 
trying to reconcile the dogma of faith with the arguments of reason. 
Or, it may even be worse. Deep down a physicist may feel the real worthlessness of 
all these new and old scientific theories, but he is afraid to be left hanging in mid-air 
with nothing but a negation. He has no system to take the place of the one whose falsity 
he already 
* Dr Ernst Mach, Contributions to the Analysis of the Sensations, trans. C. M. 
Williams, Open Court Publishing Co., Chicago, 1897, pp. 191, 192, 193.

[PAG 22]
feels; he is afraid to make a leap into the void. And, lacking the courage to 
admit openly that he no longer believes in anything he continues to wear all 
these contradictory theories, like some official uniform, for the sole reason 
that this uniform is connected with rights and privileges, both inner and 
outer, consisting of a certain assurance in himself and the surrounding world 
which he has neither the strength nor the courage to renounce. An 
'unbelieving positivist' is the tragic figure of modem times, similar to the 
'atheist' or the 'unbelieving priest' of the times of Voltaire. 
The same fear of a vacuum gives rise to all the dualistic theories which 
accept 'spirit' and 'matter' as different principles, co-existing but independent 
of one another. 
On the whole, the present state of our 'science' would be of great 
psychological interest to an unbiased observer. In all the domains of 
scientific knowledge there is a great accumulation of facts disrupting the 
harmony of the accepted systems. And these systems are able to exist only
through the heroic efforts of scientists who strive to shut their eyes to the 
long series of new facts which threaten to engulf everything in an irresistible 
flood. Yet if these facts, destructive to the systems, were collected together, 
their number in every domain would be likely to prove greater than the 
number of facts on which the systems are founded. The systematization of 
that which we do not know may provide more for correct knowledge of the 
world and ourselves than the systematization of what, in the opinion of 'exact 
science', we do know.

[PAG 23]
CHAPTER 2  
A new view of Kant's problem. Hinton's books. 'Space-sense' and its evolution. A 
system for developing the sense of the fourth dimension by means of exercises with 
different coloured cubes. The geometrical concept of space. Three perpendiculars. 
Why are there only three? Can everything existing be measured by three 
perpendiculars? Physical and metaphysical facts. Signs of existence. The reality of 
ideas. The insufficient evidence of the existence of matter and motion. Matter and 
motion arc only logical concepts, like 'good' and 'evil'. 
I have already said that Kant put forward a problem, but he offered no 
solution to it nor did he indicate any way to its solution. Neither have any of 
the known commentators, interpreters, followers or opponents of Kant found 
this solution or the way to it. 
I find the first glimmer of a right understanding of Kant's problem, and the 
first hints as to a possible way to its solution, in the attempts at a new 
approach to the study of this problem of space and time, connected with the 
idea of the 'fourth dimension' and the idea of higher dimensions in general. 
The books of the English writer, C. H. Hinton, A New Era of Thought and 
The Fourth Dimension, contain an interesting survey of much that has been 
done in this direction.* 
Hinton says, among other things, that commentaries on Kant's ideas 
usually deal only with their negative side, that is to say, the fact that we can 
perceive things through the senses, only in time and space, is regarded as an 
obstacle, preventing us from seeing what things in themselves are actually
like, not allowing us to know them as they really are, imposing on them 
something that does not belong to them, something that shuts them off from 
us. 
But [says Hinton], if we take Kant's statement simply as it is [ - not seeing in spatial 
perception a hindrance to right perception - and say to ourselves that we apprehend 
by means of space, then it is equally allowable to consider our space-sense] not as a 
negative condition hindering us from apprehending the world, but as a positive means 
by which the mind grasps its experience [i.e. by means of which we apprehend the 
world]. 
* Hi