=== Tertium Organum (P. D. Ouspensky).pdf — CHUNK 17/18 ===
Chars: 43,277 | Offset: 707,840



[PAG 280]
the miserable sense whereof replaced man's former feeling of innocence. That then, 
and not till then, man began to labour and to cover his body. Stranger than all, the 
story runs, that along with this change or immediately following upon it there came 
into man's mind the remarkable conviction which has never since left it but which has 
been kept alive . . . by the teaching of all true seers, prophets and poets that this 
accursed thing which has bitten man's heel should eventually be crushed and 
subjugated by man himself - by the rising up within him of a Saviour - the Christ. 
Man's progenitor was a creature . . . with simple consciousness merely. He was (as 
are to-day the animals) incapable of sin or of the feeling of sin, and equally 
incapable of shame (at least in the human sense). He had no feeling or knowledge of 
good and evil. He as yet knew nothing of what we call work and had never laboured. 
From this state he fell (or rose) into self-consciousness, his eyes were opened, he 
knew that he was naked, he felt shame, acquired the sense of sin (became in fact 
what is called a sinner) and learned to do certain things in order to encompass certain 
ends - that is, he learned to labour. 
For weary eons this condition has lasted - the sense of sin still haunts his pathway 
- by the sweat of his brow he still eats bread - he is still ashamed. Where is the 
deliverer, the Saviour? Who or what? 
The Saviour of man is Cosmic Consciousness - in Paul's language - the Christ. 
The cosmic sense (in whatever mind it appears) crushes the serpent's head - destroys 
sin, shame, the sense of good and evil as contrasted one with the other, and will 
annihilate labour, though not human activity. 
IV 
A personal exposition of Dr Bucke's own cosmic experience and the feelings 
which preceded it will perhaps help the reader to understand the essence of 
the facts expounded below. 
He was subject at times to a sort of ecstasy of curiosity and hope. As on one special 
occasion when about ten years old he earnestly longed to die that the secrets of the 
beyond, if there was any beyond, might be revealed to him. . . . 
At the age of thirty he fell in with [Walt Whitman's] 'Leaves of Grass', and at once 
saw that it contained, in greater measure than any book so far found, what he had so 
long been looking for. He read the 'Leaves' eagerly, even passionately, but for 
several years derived little from them. At last light broke and there was revealed to 
him (as far perhaps as such things can be revealed) at least some of the meanings. 
Then occurred that to which the foregoing is preface. 
It was in the early spring, at the beginning of his thirty-sixth year. He and two 
friends had spent the evening reading Wordsworth, Shelley, Keats, Browning, and 
especially Whitman. They parted at midnight, and

[PAG 281]
he had a long drive in a hansom (it was an English city). His mind deeply under the 
influence of the ideas, images and emotions called up by the reading and talk of the 
evening, was calm and peaceful. He was in a state of quiet, almost passive enjoyment. 
All at once, without warning of any kind, he found himself wrapped around as it were 
by a flame-coloured cloud. For an instant he thought of fire, some sudden 
conflagration in the great city; 
the next he knew that the light was within himself. Directly afterwards came upon 
him a sense of exultation, of immense joyousness accompanied or immediately 
followed by an intellectual illumination quite impossible to describe. Into his brain 
streamed one momentary lightning-flash of the Brahmic splendour which has ever 
since lightened his life; upon his heart fell one drop of Brahmic Bliss, leaving 
thenceforward for always an aftertaste of heaven. Among other things he did not 
come to believe, he saw and, knew that the Cosmos is not dead matter but a living 
Presence, that the soul of man is immortal, that the universe is so built and ordered 
that without any peradventure all things work together for the good of each and all, 
that the foundation principle of the world is what we call love and that the happiness 
of everyone is in the long run absolutely certain. He claims that he learned more 
within the few seconds during which the illumination lasted than in previous months 
or even years of study, and that he learned much that no study could ever have taught. 
. . . 
The illumination itself continued not more than a few moments, but its effect proved 
ineffaceable; it was impossible for him ever to forget what he at that time saw and 
knew; neither did he, nor could he, ever doubt the truth of what was then presented to 
his mind. There was no return that night or at any other time of the experience. . . . 
The supreme occurrence of that night was his real and sole initiation to the new and 
higher order of ideas. But it was only an initiation. He saw the light but had no more 
idea whence it came and what it meant than had the first creature that saw the light of 
the sun. Years afterwards he met a man who had entered the higher life of which he 
had had a glimpse and had had a large experience of its phenomena. His conversation 
with this man threw a flood of light upon the true meaning of what he had himself ex­
perienced. . . . 
He saw the significance of the subjective light in the case of Paul and in that of 
Mohammed. The secret of Whitman's transcendent greatness was revealed to him. 
[Certain conversations and personal intercourse with men who had similar 
experiences (among whom was Edward Carpenter)] assisted greatly in the broadening 
and clearing up of his speculations. . . . But much time and labour were still required 
before the germinal concept could be satisfactorily elaborated and matured, the idea, 
namely, that there exists a family sprung from, living among, but scarcely forming a 
pan of ordinary humanity, whose members are spread about throughout the advanced 
races of mankind and throughout the last forty centuries of the world's history. 
The trait that distinguishes these people from other men is this: Their spiritual eyes 
have been opened and they have seen. The better known members of this group who, 
were they collected together, could be accommodated all at one time in a modem 
drawing-room, have created all

[PAG 282]
the great modern religions . . . and, generally speaking have created, through religion 
and literature, modem civilization. Not that they have contributed any large 
numerical proportion of the books which have been written, but that they have 
produced the few books which have inspired the larger number of all that have been 
written in modem times. These men dominate the last twenty-five . . . centuries as 
stars of the first magnitude dominate the midnight sky. 
V 
It remains to say a few words upon the psychological origin of... Cosmic 
Consciousness. . . . 
Although in the birth of Cosmic Consciousness the moral nature plays an 
important part, it will be better for many reasons to confine our attention at present 
to the evolution of the intellect. In this evolution there are four distinct steps. The 
first of them was taken when upon the primary quality of excitability sensation was 
established. At this point began the acquisition and more or less perfect registration 
of sense impressions -that is, of percepts. A percept is of course a sense impression. 
... If we could go back Car enough we should find among our ancestors a creature 
whose whole intellect was made up simply of these percepts. But this creature had in 
it what may be called an eligibility of growth, and what happened with it was 
something like this: Individually and from generation to generation it accumulated 
these percepts, the constant repetition of which, calling for further and further 
registration, led... to an accumulation of cells in the centre sense ganglia. At last a 
condition was reached in which it became possible for our ancestor to combine 
groups of these percepts into what we to-day call a recept. This process is very 
similar to that of composite photography [when a series of repeated photographs is 
taken on one negative; for example, snapshots of members of the same family]. 
Similar percepts (as of a tree) are registered one over the other until they are 
generalized into ... a recept (of a tree). 
Now the work of accumulation begins again on a higher plane. The sensory 
organs keep steadily at work manufacturing percepts; the receptual centres keep 
steadily at work manufacturing more and yet more recepts.... The capacities of the 
central ganglia are constantly taxed to do the necessary registration of percepts, the 
necessary elaboration of these into recepts and the necessary registration of recepts; 
then as the ganglia by use and selection are improved they constantly manufacture 
from percepts and from the initial simple recepts, more and more complex, that is, 
higher and higher recepts. 
At last, after many thousands of generations have lived and died, comes a time 
when the mind ... has reached the highest possible point of purely receptual 
intelligence; the accumulation of percepts and of recepts has gone on until no greater 
stores of impressions can be laid up. . . . Then another break is made and the higher 
recepts are replaced by concepts. The relation of a concept to a recept is somewhat 
similar to the relation of

[PAG 283]
algebra to arithmetic. A recept is, as I have said, a composite image of hundreds, 
perhaps thousands, of percepts. . . . But a concept is that composite image - that 
same recept - named, ticketed, and, as it were, dismissed. A concept is in fact neither 
more nor less than a named recept -the name, that is, the sign (as in algebra) standing 
henceforth for the thing itself, that is, for the recept. 
Now it is as clear as day to anyone who will give the least thought to the subject, 
that the evolution by which the concepts are substituted for recepts increases the 
efficiency of the brain for thought as much as the introduction of machinery 
increased the capacity of the race for work - or as much as the use of algebra 
increases the power of the mind in mathematical calculations. To replace a great 
cumbersome recept by a simple sign was almost like replacing actual goods - as 
wheat, fabrics and hardware - by entries in the ledger. 
But, as hinted above, in order that a recept may be replaced by a concept it must 
be named, or, in other words, marked with a sign which stands for it - just as a check 
stands for a piece of goods; in other words, the race that is in possession of concepts 
is also, and necessarily, in possession of language. Further, it should be noted, as the 
possession of concepts implies the possession of language, so the possession of 
concepts and language (which are in reality two aspects of the same thing) implies 
the possession of self-consciousness. All this means that there is a moment in the 
evolution of mind when the receptual intellect, capable of simple consciousness 
only, becomes almost or quite instantaneously a conceptual intellect in possession of 
language and self-consciousness. . . . 
Our intellect, then, to-day is made up of a very complex mixture of percepts, 
recepts and concepts. . . . 
The next chapter in the story is the accumulation of concepts. This is a double 
process. . . . Each one accumulates year by year a larger and larger number, while at 
the same time the individual concepts are becoming constantly more and more 
complex. 
Is there to be any limit to this growth of concepts in number and complexity? 
Whoever will seriously consider that question will see that there must be a limit. No 
such process could go on to infinity. . . . 
We have seen that the expansion of the perceptual mind had a necessary limit; that 
its own continued life led it inevitably up to and into the receptual mind. That the 
receptual mind by its own growth was inevitably led up to and into the conceptual 
mind. A priori considerations make it certain that a corresponding outlet will be 
found for the conceptual mind. 
But we do not need to depend on abstract reasoning to demonstrate the necessary 
existence of the supra-conceptual mind, since it exists and can be studied with no 
more difficulty than other natural phenomena. The supra-conceptual intellect, the 
elements of which instead of being concepts are intuitions, is already (in small 
numbers it is true) an established fact, and the form of consciousness that belongs to 
that intellect may be called and has been called - Cosmic Consciousness. . . . 
The basic fact in cosmic consciousness is implied in its name - that fact is 
consciousness of the cosmos - this is what is called in the East the 'Brahmic 
Splendour', which is in Dante's phrase capable of trans-humanizing a man into a god. 
Whitman, who has an immense deal to say

[PAG 284]
about it, speaks of it in one place as an 'ineffable light-light rare, untellable, lighting 
the very light - beyond all signs, descriptions, languages.' This consciousness shows 
the cosmos to consist not of dead matter governed by unconscious, rigid, and 
unintending law; it shows it on the contrary as entirely immaterial, entirely spiritual 
and entirely alive; 
it shows that death is an absurdity, that everyone and everything has eternal life; it 
shows that the universe is God and that God is the universe. ... A great deal of this 
is, of course, from the point of view of self-consciousness, absurd; it is nevertheless 
undoubtedly true. Now all this does not mean that when a man has cosmic 
consciousness he knows everything about the universe. We all know that when at 
three years of age we acquired self-consciousness we did not at once know all about 
ourselves. ... So neither does a man know all about the cosmos merely because he 
becomes conscious of it. 
If it has taken the race several hundred thousand years to learn a smattering of the 
science of humanity since its acquisition of self-consciousness, so it may take 
millions of years to acquire . . . cosmic consciousness. 
As on self-consciousness is based the human world as we see it,... so on cosmic 
consciousness is based the higher religions and the higher philosophies and what 
comes from them, and on it will be based, when it becomes more general, a new 
world of which it would be idle to try to speak to-day. 
The philosophy of the birth of cosmic consciousness in the individual is very 
similar to that of the birth of self-consciousness. The mind becomes overcrowded 
(as it were) with concepts and these are constantly becoming larger, more numerous 
and more and more complex. Some day (the conditions being all favourable) the 
fusion, or what might be called the chemical union, of several of them and of certain 
moral elements takes place; the result is an intuition and the establishment of the 
intuitional mind, or, in other words, cosmic consciousness.* 
The scheme by which the mind is built up is uniform from beginning to end: a 
recept is made of many percepts; a concept of many or several recepts and percepts, 
and an intuition is made of many concepts, recepts and percepts together with other 
elements belonging to and drawn from the moral nature. The cosmic vision or 
intuition, from which what may be called the new mind takes its name, is thus seen 
to be simply the complex and union of all prior thought and experience - just as self­
consciousness is the complex and union of all thought and experience prior to it. 
Cosmic consciousness, like other forms of consciousness, is capable of growth; it 
may have different forms, different degrees. 
It must not be supposed that because a man has cosmic consciousness he is 
therefore omniscient and infallible. . . . [Men of cosmic consciousness have reached 
a high level, but on that level there can be different degrees of consciousness.] - And 
it must be still more evident that, however godlike the faculty may be, those who 
first acquire it, living in diverse ages and countries, passing the years of their ... life 
in different surroundings, brought up to view of life and interests of life from totally 
different points 
* See Comment No. 3, p. 288.

[PAG 285]
of view, must necessarily interpret somewhat differently those things which they see 
in the new world which they enter. 
Language corresponds to the intellect and is therefore capable of expressing it 
perfectly and directly; on the other hand, the functions of the moral nature are not 
connected with language and are only capable of indirect expression by its agency. 
Perhaps music, which certainly has its roots in the moral nature, is, as at present 
existing, the beginning of a language which will tally and express emotion as words 
tally and express ideas. . . . 
Language is the exact tally of the intellect: for every concept there is a word or 
words and for every word there is a concept. . . . No word can come into being 
except as the expression of a concept, neither can a new concept be formed without 
the formation (at the same time) of the new word which is its expression. . . . But as 
a matter of fact ninety-nine out of every hundred of our sense impressions and 
emotions have never been represented in the intellect by concepts and therefore 
remain unexpressed and inexpressible except imperfectly by roundabout description 
and suggestion. . . . 
As the correspondence of words and concepts is not casual or temporary but 
resides in the nature of these and continues during all time and under all 
circumstances absolutely constant, so changes in one of the factors must correspond 
with changes in the other. So evolution of intellect must be accompanied by 
evolution of language. An evolution of language will be evidence of intellect. . . . 
It seems that in every, or nearly every, man who enters into cosmic consciousness 
apprehension is at first more or less excited, the person doubting whether the new 
sense may not be a symptom or form of insanity. Mohammed was greatly alarmed. I 
think it is clear that Paul was . . . similarly affected. 
The first thing each person asks himself upon experiencing the new sense is: Does 
what I see and feel represent reality or am I suffering from a delusion? The fact that 
the new experience seems even more real than the old teachings of simple and self 
consciousness does not at first fully reassure him, because he knows 'the power of 
delusions'. 
Simultaneously or instantly following the above sense and emotional experiences 
there comes to the person an intellectual illumination quite impossible to describe. 
Like a flash there is presented to his consciousness a clear conception (a vision) in 
outline of the meaning and drift of the universe. He does not come to believe 
merely; but he sees and knows that the cosmos, which to the self-conscious mind 
seems made up of dead matter, is in fact far otherwise - is in very truth a living 
presence. He sees that instead of men being, as it were, patches of life scattered 
through an infinite sea of non-living substance, they are in reality specks of relative 
death in an infinite ocean of life. He sees that the life which is in man is eternal, as 
all life is eternal; that the soul of man is as immortal as God is. ... 
The person who passes through this experience will learn . . . much that no study 
ever taught or can teach. Especially does he obtain such a conception of THE WHOLE, 
or at least of an immense WHOLE as dwarfs all conception, imagination or 
speculation . . . such a conception as makes the

[PAG 286]
old attempts to mentally grasp the universe and its meaning petty and ridiculous. 
This expansion of the intellect enormously increases the capacity of acquiring
and accumulating knowledge, as well as the capacity of initiative. 
The history of the development and appearance of cosmic consciousness in humanity 
is exactly similar to the appearance of all individual mental faculties. When a new 
faculty appears, it will be found, in the beginning, in a few exceptional individuals. 
After a time it becomes more frequent; 
still later it becomes capable of being developed and acquired by all and, finally, 
becomes an attribute of all men from birth. Moreover rare, exceptional faculties, 
faculties of a genius, appear in man in his maturity, and at times even in old age. 
Becoming more common, more in the nature of 'talents', they begin to appear in 
younger men. Later, becoming 'abilities' they begin to appear even in children. And, 
finally, they become the common property of all from birth, and their absence is 
regarded as a defect. 
Such is the faculty of speech (i.e. the faculty of forming concepts). Probably in the 
remote past, on the borderline of the appearance of human consciousness, this faculty 
belonged to only a few exceptional individuals and, very likely, began to manifest 
itself only in old age. Later it became more frequent and began to appear earlier. 
There probably was a period when speech was not an attribute of all men, just as 
artistic talents - the musical sense, the sense of colour and lines - do not now belong to 
all men. Gradually it became possible for all, and later inevitable and indispensable 
barring some physical defect.* 
Comments on the quotations from Dr Bucke's book 
1 I quoted Dr Bucke's opinion about the three coming revolutions, though I 
must say that I do not at all share his optimism regarding social life which, as 
he makes out, can and must change through material causes (conquest of the 
air and social revolution). The only possible basis for favourable changes in 
external life (if such changes are possible at all) can only be changes in the 
inner life, i.e. those changes which Dr Bucke calls the psychical revolution. 
This is the only thing that can create a better future for people. All cultural 
achievements in the domain of the material are double-edged and may 
equally serve either good or evil. Only a change in consciousness itself can be 
a guarantee that the abuse of powers given by culture will cease and culture 
will no longer be a 'growth of barbarism'. Demo­
* Dr R. M. Bucke, Cosmic Consciousness, Philadelphia, Innes & Sons, 1905, 
reprinted New York, Dutton, 1969.

[PAG 287]
cratic organization and the nominal rule of the majority guarantee nothing.
On the contrary, even now, wherever they are put into practice - if only in 
name - they immediately produce, and promise to produce on a still larger
scale in the future, violence, curtailment of individual rights and restriction of 
liberty.
2 Dr Bucke says that once human consciousness is attained, further evolution 
is inevitable. In assuming this Dr Bucke is making a mistake common to all 
people who dogmatize the idea of evolution. Having drawn a very correct 
sketch of the consecutive gradations of the observed forms of consciousness 
(of animal-vegetable, animal and man) Dr Bucke regards this gradation 
entirely in the light of the evolution of one form out of another, completely
ignoring the possibility of other points of view. For example, he ignores the 
possibility that each of the existing forms may be a link in a separate 
evolutionary chain, i.e. that the evolutions of animal-vegetables, of animals 
and of man are different evolutions, follow different courses and do not pass 
one into another. This point of view is entirely justifiable if we take into 
consideration the fact that transitory forms are never known to us. Further, Dr 
Bucke makes an altogether arbitrary assumption concerning the inevitability
of a further evolution of man. The unconscious evolution of the vegetable and 
animal kingdoms (i.e. unconscious for the individual, directed by the con­
sciousness of the species) is no longer possible with the appearance of 
thinking in man. We must admit that human mind depends on itself much 
more than the mind of the animal. Human mind has much more power over 
itself and can help its own evolution, as well as hinder it. The general 
question is: can unconscious evolution be maintained with the appearance of 
thinking? It would be much more correct to think that the appearance of 
thinking abolishes the possibility of an unconscious evolution. Power over 
evolution passes from the spirit of the species (or from Nature) to the 
individual. Further evolution (if it takes place) can no longer be the result of 
primordial and unconscious causes, but will depend on conscious efforts 
towards growth.* This is the most interesting thing in the whole process, but 
Dr Bucke does not point it out. A man who does not strive towards evolution, 
who is not conscious of its possibility and is not helping it, will not evolve. 
And an individual who does not evolve does not remain in a static state, but 
goes down, degenerates (i.e. certain of his elements begin their own 
evolution, hostile to the 
* See Chapter 10, quotation from Mabel Collins's book The Story of the Year, a 
Record of Feast and Ceremonies by the author of 'Light on the Path', London, 1895, p. 
63.

[PAG 288]
whole). This is a general law. And if we consider what a very small 
percentage of men think and are capable of thinking about their evolution (or
of striving towards higher things), then we shall see that to talk of the 
inevitability of that evolution is at least naive. 
3 Speaking of the formation of a higher faculty of perception and thinking, 
Dr Bucke leaves out one very important circumstance. He himself remarks 
previously that there takes place in the mind a blending of concepts with 
emotional elements, the result of which is a new understanding, and then­
cosmic consciousness. Thus it follows from his own words that cosmic 
consciousness is not merely a blending of concepts with emotional elements, 
or of ideas with feelings, but is the result of this blending. But Dr Bucke does 
not give this point sufficient attention, and, further on, regards the funda­
mental element of cosmic consciousness as the blending of percepts, recepts 
and concepts with elements belonging to emotional nature. This, however, is 
already wrong, because it is not simply a blending of thought and feeling, but 
the result of blending, or, in other words, it is — thought and feeling, plus
something else that is not to be found either in the intellect or in the 
emotional nature. 
But Dr Bucke regards the new faculties of understanding and feeling as the 
product of the evolution of the existing faculties and thus deprives all his 
deductions of value. Imagine that a scientist from another planet, who does 
not suspect the existence of man, studies a horse and its 'evolution' from a 
foal to a riding horse, and sees the highest degree of its evolution in a horse 
with a man on its back. From our point of view it is clear that it is impossible 
to regard the man in the saddle as a fact of equine evolution. But from the 
point of view of a scientist who does not know about man, it will be only
logical. Dr Bucke is in exactly the same position when he takes as a fact of 
human evolution that which transcends the domain of the human. A man who 
possesses cosmic consciousness or approaches cosmic consciousness is no 
longer simply a man but a man plus something higher. Dr Bucke, as also in 
many instances Edward Carpenter, is hindered by a desire not to go too 
sharply against the usual accepted views (although that is inevitable); by a 
desire to reconcile the accepted views with the 'new thought', to smooth 
down contradictions, to reduce everything to one - which of course is as 
impossible as to reconcile the true and the false, the correct and the incorrect. 
The greater part of Dr Bucke's book consists of examples and fragments from 
the teachings and writings of 'men of cosmic con-

[PAG 289]
sciousness' in the world's history. He draws parallels between those teachings 
and establishes the unity of the forms of transition into the new state of 
consciousness in men belonging to different centuries and peoples, and the 
unity of their sensations of the world and themselves, testifying more than 
anything else to the genuineness and reality of their experiences. 
The founders of world religions, prophets, philosophers, poets -in Bucke's 
book these are 'men of cosmic consciousness'. He does not pretend to give a 
complete list, and one could certainly add many more names to it.* 
But, after all, what is important is not the imperfections of Bucke's book, 
nor the amendments which could be made to it. The important thing is the 
general conclusion which Dr Bucke draws about the possibility and the 
nearness of the NEW CONSCIOUSNESS. 
This tells us that NEW HUMANITY is near at hand. We build, without taking
into account the fact that a NEW MASTER must come who may not approve at 
all of what we have built. Our 'social sciences', sociology, etc., have only man 
in view. Yet, as I have already pointed out many times, 'man' is a composite 
concept, including in itself different categories of men whose paths are 
completely different. And the future belongs not to man but to superman,
who is already born and lives among us. 
A higher race is rapidly arising from the bulk of humanity, and it is arising
through its own peculiar, understanding of the world and of life. 
It will truly be a HIGHER RACE - and there will be no possibility of any
falsification, any substitution, any usurpation. Nor will it be possible for 
anything to be bought, nor appropriated by deceit or force. And not only is 
this race coming, but it is already here. 
Men approaching the transition to this new race are already beginning to 
recognize one another; watchwords, signs and countersigns are already being 
established. . . . And maybe the social and political problems, so acutely
thrust forward by our times, will be solved on quite a different plane and in a 
totally different manner than 
* Dr Bucke makes a very grave mistake in speaking about self-consciousness. In 
his opinion 'simple consciousness' is a characteristic of an animal, and 'self­
consciousness' a characteristic of man. But as a matter of fact a prolonged self­
consciousness during sensing, feeling or thinking is a very rare phenomenon in man. 
As a rule what is called self-consciousness is simply a thought, and it takes place post 
factum. True self-consciousness exists in men only as a potentiality, and if it manifests 
at all, does so only at moments. These momentary flashes of self-consciousness should 
be distinguished from prolonged self-consciousness. Prolonged self-consciousness is 
already a new consciousness. It brings with it the possibility of moments of cosmic 
consciousness, which, in its turn, may with further development, become prolonged.

[PAG 290]
we think - namely, by the appearance on the stage of a new race, CONSCIOUS 
OF ITSELF, which will then judge the old race. 
In my comments I pointed out certain defects of Dr Bucke's book, arising
chiefly from a kind of irresolution, a fear to admit the paramount importance 
of higher consciousness. This fear lies at the basis of Dr Bucke's desire to 
view the future of humanity from the positivist standpoint, basing it on 
political and social revolutions. But this view has lost all value. In the bloody 
epoch we are now going through, the bankruptcy of materialism, i.e. of 
logical systems, in the organizing of life is becoming self-evident even to 
those people who only yesterday were extolling 'culture' and 'civilization'. It 
becomes increasingly clear that changes in the external life, i.e. changes in 
the life of the many, if they must come at all, will come as a result of inner 
changes in the few. 
Further, taking Dr Bucke's book as a whole, we may say that, having 
assumed the natural growth of consciousness, he does not notice the fact that 
the unfolding of these faculties is not a natural process, but that it requires 
conscious work. Dr Bucke does not mention at all any conscious efforts in 
this direction, does not speak of the idea of the culture of cosmic 
consciousness. Yet there exists a whole series of psychological teachings 
(occultism, yoga and so on) and a voluminous literature, having in view 
precisely this systematic culture of higher consciousness. Dr Bucke does not 
seem to notice this, although he himself touches upon it several times, and 
continues to take his stand on the idea of natural growth. At one point in his 
book he speaks very contemptuously about the use of narcotics for the 
creation of ecstatic states, not taking into consideration the fact that narcotics 
cannot give a man anything he has not already got (which explains the totally
different effect of narcotics on different people). All they can do, in certain 
cases, is to reveal that which is already in a man's soul. This circumstance 
completely alters the view of narcotics, as Professor James has shown in his 
book The Varieties of Religious Experience. 
On the whole, carried away by the evolutionary point of view and fixing
his eyes on the future, Dr Bucke, like many others, does not pay sufficient 
attention to the present. Yet the new consciousness which a man may find or 
awaken in himself is naturally more important for him than the consciousness 
which may or may not appear in other men thousands of years hence. 
Examining from different standpoints the complex forms of the

[PAG 291]
manifestation of spirit, and analysing the views and opinions of different 
thinkers, we are constantly confronted with what seems to be gradual phases 
or consecutive stages of development. And we find that these stages or phases 
are four in number. Examining further the living world known to us, from the 
lowest living organism to man, we see the simultaneous existence of all the 
four forms of consciousness, to which all the other aspects of inner life 
correspond: space-sense, time-sense, form of activity, and so on. Further, 
examining the higher type of man we see in him the presence of all the four 
forms of consciousness which exist in living nature, with corresponding
forms. 
Forms of consciousness 
'Higher type of man' Living world 
Latent consciousness, 
similar to our instincts 
Cells, groups of cells, 
Cells, groups of cells, 
and subconscious 
plants and lower 
tissues and organs of 
feelings. 
animals; organs and 
the body. 
parts of the body of 
higher animals and 
Simple consciousness and 
flashes of thought. 
Thinking, moments of 
self-consciousness and 
flashes of cosmic con­
sciousness. 
Self-consciousness and 
beginning of cosmic 
consciousness. 
Animals possessing 
complex organisms. 
Absence of awareness of 
death. 
Man. 
Awareness of death, 
or fantastic theories of 
immortality. 
Higher type of man. 
Beginning of immor­
tality. 
Body, instinct, appetites, 
voices of the body. 
Emotions. 
Simple emotions and 
logical reason. 
Higher emotions, higher 
intellect, mystical 
knowledge. 
The simultaneous existence of all the four forms of consciousness at once, 
both in nature and in the higher type of man renders the exclusively 
evolutionary point of view too strained and artificial. The evolutionary point 
of view is often simply a refusal to face a difficult problem, a desire to avoid 
thinking too much. This is the reason why the evolutionary point of view is 
often applied where there is no need of it whatever. Very often it is a 
compromise of thought. Not understanding the existing variety of forms and 
their interconnections, and not knowing how to think of it all as a unity, 
people seize upon the evolutionary view and regard the variety of forms as an 
ascending

[PAG 292]
ladder. This view is, of course, derived not from real facts but from the desire 
at all costs to systematize what they observe, be it even on entirely artificial 
grounds. People think that if they construe a system, they already know 
something. But in reality absence of a system is very often nearer to true 
knowledge than an artificial system. 
'Evolutionists' who are incapable of understanding the whole, without 
representing it to themselves as a chain, each link of which is derived from 
another link, are like the blind men in an Eastern tale who feel an elephant 
from different sides and assert, one that the elephant is like pillars, another 
that he is like a thick rope, and so on. Only, evolutionists add to this that the 
elephant's trunk must have evolved from his legs, the ears from the trunk, and 
so on. But, after all, we know that all this is - an elephant, i.e. one single 
being, unknown to the blind men. Just such a single being is the living world. 
And with regard to forms of consciousness, it is much more correct to regard
them not as consecutive stages, nor as phases of evolution, distinct from one 
another, but as different sides or pans of one whole, which we do not know. 
In 'man' this unity is self-evident. All the forms of consciousness can exist 
in him simultaneously: the life of the cells and the organs with their 
consciousnesses; the life of the whole body, taken as one; 
the life of emotions and logical reason, and the life of higher forms of 
consciousness. 
The higher form of consciousness is necessary for the organization of life 
on earth, as we are already beginning to see. For a long time, under the rule of 
materialism and positivist thought, people forgot or distorted religious ideas 
and thought it possible to live by logical reason alone. But now, little by little, 
it becomes evident to those who have eyes to see, that people, left to the 
mercy of logical reasoning only, are incapable of organizing their life on 
earth, and if they do not finally exterminate one another as did some 
Polynesian tribes, they will at any rate create (and have already created) 
utterly impossible conditions of life in which everything gained will be lost, 
i.e. everything that was given them by men of self-consciousness and of 
cosmic consciousness. 
The living world of nature (including man) is analogous to man, and it is 
much more convenient and correct to regard the different forms of 
consciousness in the different parts and strata of living nature not as separate
and evolving from one another, but as belonging to one organism and 
fulfilling functions which, although different, are interconnected. In that case 
the necessity for all naive theorizing on the

[PAG 293]
subject of evolution disappears. After all, we do not regard the organs and 
limbs of a man's body as evolved one from another in a given individual, and 
we must do the same with relation to the organs and limbs of the body of 
living nature. 
I do not deny the law of evolution; but it means something quite different. 
And its application for the purpose of explaining many phenomena of life 
stands in need of drastic corrections. 
First of all, even if we accept the idea of one general evolution, we still 
have to bear in mind that the types lagging behind, the remnants of evolution, 
may not continue the same evolution at a slow pace in the rear, but may start 
their own evolution, in many cases developing precisely those properties for 
which they were thrown out of the main evolution. 
Second, in accepting the law of evolution, there is no need to regard all 
existing forms as derived one from another. It would be much more correct, 
in such cases, to regard them all as the higher types in their own evolution. 
The absence of transitory forms renders this view much more likely than the 
view which is usually accepted and which provides such rich material for 
dissertations on the obligatory and inevitable perfection of everything ­
perfection from our point of view. 
The views outlined here, and the idea of the living world as one organism, 
are naturally more difficult than the ordinary evolutionary point of view. But 
one should try to overcome this difficulty. I have already said that the real 
world is bound to be illogical from an ordinary point of view, and can never 
be plain and simple to all and sundry. The theory of evolution requires many 
amendments and needs to be expanded and amplified. If we take the existing
forms on any one plane, it is utterly impossible to assert that all these forms 
have evolved from the simplest forms on that plane. Some will no doubt have 
evolved from the lower forms; others will have resulted from the 
degeneration of higher forms; a third category will have formed from the 
remnants of some evolved form - and a fourth resulted from infiltration into 
that plane of properties and characteristics of a higher plane. In this case these 
complex forms cannot be regarded as the product of evolution taking place on 
the original plane. 
The table appended on pages 282-4 will show more clearly the correlation 
of the different forms of manifestation of consciousness, or of different states 
of consciousness. 
First form. A sense of one-dimensional space in relation to the external 
world. Everything takes place, as it were, on one line.

[PAG 294]
Table of the four forms of the manifestation of consciousness 
First form 
Second form 
Third form 
Fourth form 
Sense of Sense of one-
Sense of two-
Sense of three-
Sense of four-
space and dimensional 
dimensional 
dimensional 
dimensional 
time space. The 
space. The 
space. The 
space. Spatial 
world on a line. 
world on a 
world in an 
sense of time. 
The line as 
plane. The 
infinite sphere. 
space. Every 
plane as space. 
The sphere as 
thing else as 
All the rest as 
space. All the 
time. Every 
time. Angles 
rest as time. 
thing not lying 
and curves as 
Phenomena as 
on this line is 
movements. 
movements. 
in motion. 
Non-existence of 
'past' and 
•future'. A 
becoming and 
changing 
universe. 
Psychology Appearance of 
Representation. 
Concept. 
Expansion of 
the first sen 
Expression of 
Words. 
concepts. 
sation. One 
sensations by 
Judgment. 
Higher 
sensation. Its 
cries, sounds, 
Inference. 
emotions. Self-
division into 
movements. 
Thinking. 
consciousness. 
two. Gradual 
Absence of 
Speech. Written 
New sensations. 
evolution of 
words and 
language. 
Cosmic 
sensations 
speech. If there 
Allegory. 
consciousness. 
and the 
is speech, it 
Emotions. 
accumulation of 
consists of 
memories of 
proper names 
them. 
only. 
Logic Absence of 
This is this. 
A is A. A is not 
A is both A and 
thinking or 
That is that. 
not-A. Each 
not A. Tat 
confused think 
This is not that. 
thing is either 
twam asi: Thou 
ing of the 2nd 
Rudiments of 
A or not A. 
art that. 
form. 
logic. The logic 
Dualistic logic. 
Tertium 
of the single 
The logic of 
Organum.' 
ness of each 
contrapositions. 
Logic of the 
separate thing. 
Syllogism. 
unity of all. 
Mathematics Absence of 
Comparison of 
Every magni 
A magnitude 
counting or 
separate visible 
tude is equal to 
can be not equal 
confused count 
objects or of 
itself. A part is 
to itself. A pan 
ing of the 2nd 
separate repre-
smaller than the 
can be equal to 
form. 
sensations. 
whole, etc. 
the whole, etc. 
Direct sense of 
Finite and 
Mathematics of 
quantity. Count-
constant 
infinite and 
ing within the 
numbers. 
variable 
limits of this 
Euclidean 
magnitudes. 
sense. 
geometry. 
Meta-geometry.