=== Tertium Organum (P. D. Ouspensky).pdf — CHUNK 11/18 ===
Chars: 45,000 | Offset: 443,971



[PAG 181]
coherence and unity, such as a philosophical school, a church, a sect, a 
masonic order, a society, a party, etc., is undoubtedly a living being, 
possessing a certain intelligence. A people, a nation is a living being; 
mankind is also a living being. It is the Great Man, the ADAM KADMON of the 
Kabalists. ADAM KADMON is a being living in men, including in himself the 
minds of all men. H. P. Blavatsky speaks about this in her voluminous work, 
The Secret Doctrine: 'it is not the Adam of dust (of Genesis, Chapter II), who 
is thus made in the divine image, but the Divine Androgyne (of Chapter I), or 
Adam Kadmon.'* ADAM KADMON is HUMANITY or the human race - Homo 
sapiens - 'a being with the body of an animal and the face of a superman'. 
Entering as a component pan into various great and complex minds, man 
himself consists of innumerable big and small minds, many of which, while 
existing in him, do not even know one another, just as people living in the 
same house may not know one another. On the whole, if we pass to 
analogies, 'man' has much in common with a house filled with the most 
varied inhabitants, or even more so with a large ocean liner carrying a great 
many chance passengers, each going to his own destination for his own 
purpose, and including the most diverse elements. Each separate unit of the 
population of this liner orientates from himself, involuntarily and 
unconsciously taking himself for the centre of the liner. This is an 
approximately true picture of a human being.
Perhaps it would be even more appropriate to compare man with some 
separate corner of the earth, living a life of its own: with a forest lake full of 
the most varied life, reflecting the sun and the stars and concealing in its 
depths some phantasm incomprehensible to itself, perhaps an undine, perhaps 
a water-sprite. 
If we abandon analogies and pass on to real facts as far as they are 
accessible to our observation, it is necessary to begin with several somewhat 
artificial divisions of the human being. The old division into body, soul and 
spirit has some good points but often leads into error, for attempts at such a 
division immediately bring about disagreements as to where the body ends 
and the soul begins, where the soul ends and the spirit begins, etc. There are 
no strict dividing lines in this, nor can there be. Besides, one is led astray by
the fact that body, soul and spirit are set against one another, are taken in this 
case as mutually inimical principles. This also is entirely wrong, for the 
* H. P. Blavatsky, The Secret Doctrine, London and New York, Theosophical 
Publishing Society, 1897, vol. 3, p. 146.

[PAG 182]
body is the expression of the soul, and the soul is the expression of the spirit. 
The very terms, body, soul and spirit, need elucidation. The 'body' is the physical 
body with its intelligence scarcely comprehensible to us; the 'soul' is the mind studied 
by scientific psychology, i.e. reflected activity which is controlled by impressions 
coming from the external world and the body. The 'spirit' is those higher principles 
which direct, or under certain conditions may direct, the life of the soul. 
1 The body is the domain of instincts and the inner instinctive consciousnesses of 
separate organs, parts of the body and the whole organism. 
2 The soul consists of sensations, representations, concepts, thoughts, emotions and 
desires. 
3 - is the region of the unknown. 
In the usual conditions of the inner life of an ordinary man the focus of his 
consciousness, which is constantly shifting from one object to another, lies in his mind. 
I am hungry. 
I read a newspaper. 
I expect a letter. 
Only rarely does it touch the regions which are open to religious, aesthetic and 
moral emotions and the higher intellect which finds expression in abstract thinking 
connected with moral and aesthetic feeling, i.e. with the realization of the necessity to 
co-ordinate thought, feeling, word and deed. 
But usually, in saying 'I', a man means not the total complex of all the three 
domains, but that which is at the moment in the focus of his consciousness. I want: 
these words which play the most important role in man's life, are usually far from 
referring simultaneously to all the sides of his being; as a rule they refer merely to some 
very small and insignificant facet which at the given moment fills the focus of 
consciousness and subjugates all the rest, until it is driven out by another equally 
insignificant facet. 
And in the mind of a man there goes on an endless shifting of view from one object 
to another. Through the focus of perception there runs a continuous cinema film of 
feelings and impressions and each separate impression determines the 'I' of the given 
moment. 
From this point of view the mind of a man has often been compared to a dark sleeping 
city in the midst of which watchman's lanterns

[PAG 183]
slowly move about, each throwing light on a small circle round itself. This is 
a perfectly true analogy. At each moment there come into focus a few of 
these circles illumined by the flickering light while the rest is plunged into 
darkness. 
Each small illumined circle represents an 'I', living its own life, at times 
very brief. And the movement goes on endlessly, now fast, now slow, 
bringing out into the light more and more new objects, or else old ones from 
the realm of memory, or in torment going round and round the same 
persistent thoughts.
This continuous movement which goes on in our mind, this constant 
shirting of light from one 'I' to another, may perhaps explain the phenomenon 
of motion in the external visible world. 
Intellectually we know that there is no such motion. We know that 
everything exists in the infinite spaces of time, that nothing happens, nothing
becomes, everything is. But we do not see everything at once, and so it seems 
to us that everything moves, grows, becomes. We do not see everything at 
once either in the external world or in our inner one, and this produces the 
illusion of motion. For instance, we drive swiftly past a house, and the house 
turns as we go by. But if we could see it not with our eyes, not in perspective, 
but by some kind of vision simultaneously from all sides, from above and 
below and from within, we should not see any illusory motion but should see 
the house standing completely motionless as it stands in reality. And mentally
we know that the house has not moved. 
The same applies to everything else. Motion, growth, 'becoming', which go 
on in the world around us are no more real than the movement of the house as 
we drive by, or the movement of the trees and fields past the window of a 
fast-moving railway carriage.
Movement goes on inside us, and it produces the illusion of movement 
around us. The illumined circle shifts quickly from one 'I' to another, from 
one object, one theme, one representation or image to another; in the focus of 
consciousness one 'I' rapidly succeeds another, the small flame of 
consciousness passes from one 'I' to another. This is the only true motion 
which exists in the world. If this motion were to stop and all the 'I's were to 
enter simultaneously into the focus of perception; if the light were to expand 
so as to illumine simultaneously for a man all that it reveals only gradually
and piecemeal, if a man were able at once to embrace with his mind all that 
ever entered his perception and all that is never clearly illumined by thought, 
though it affects his mind - then a man might perhaps find himself in the 
midst of a motionless universe, containing simultaneously all that usually lies 
for a man in the remote depths of

[PAG 184]
memory, in the past; all that lies at a great distance from him; all that lies in 
the future. 
C. H. Hinton speaks very well about beings of other sections of the world: 
[By the same process by which we know that there are other human beings around 
us, we may learn of the] higher intelligences by whom we are surrounded. We feel 
them, but do not realize them. To realize them, it will be necessary to develop our 
powers of perception. The power of seeing with our bodily eye is limited to the 
three-dimensional section. But. . . the inner eye is not thus limited;. . . we can 
organize our power of seeing in higher space, and ... we can form conceptions of 
realities in this higher space, just as we can in our ordinary space. 
And this affords the groundwork for the perception and study of these other 
beings than man. . . . 
We are, with reference to the higher things of life, like blind and puzzled children. 
We know that we are members of one body, limbs of one vine; 
but we cannot discern, except by instinct and feeling, what the body is, what the vine 
is. ... 
[Our task is to diminish the limitation of our perception.] Nature consists of many 
entities towards the apprehension of which we strive. 
For this purpose, says Hinton, we must first of all introduce into the mind new 
concepts and unify vast fields of observation under one common law. The real history 
of our intellectual progress lies in the growth of these new concepts. 
And . . . when the new conception is formed, it is found to be quite simple and 
natural. We ask ourselves what we have gained; and we answer: 
Nothing; we have simply removed an obvious limitation. . . . 
The question may be put: In what way do we come into contact with . . . higher 
beings at present? And evidently the answer is. In those ways in which we tend to 
form organic unions - unions in which the activities of individuals coalesce in a 
living way. 
The coherence of a military empire or of a subjugated population, presenting no 
natural nucleus of growth is not one through which we should hope to grow into 
direct contact with our higher destinies. But in friendship, in voluntary associations, 
and above all, in the family, we tend towards our greater life. . . . 
Just as, to explore the distant stars of the heavens, a particular material 
arrangement is necessary which we call a telescope, so to explore the nature of the 
beings who are higher than us, a mental arrangement is necessary. We must prepare 
our power of thinking as we prepare a more extended power of looking. We want a 
structure developed inside the skull for the one purpose, while an exterior telescope 
will do for the other.* 
* C. H. Hinton, A New Era of Thought, London, George Allen & Unwin, 1910.

[PAG 185]
This animation of the universe proceeds in the most varied directions. This tree is a 
living being. The birch tree in general - the species — is a living being. A birch grove 
is also a living being. A forest containing different kinds of trees, grass, flowers, ants, 
beetles, birds, animals - is also a living being, living by the life of everything 
composing it, thinking and feeling for everything which goes to make it up. 
This idea is expressed in a very interesting way in the article by P. Florensky 'Roots 
of Idealism common to all Mankind' (Theological Messenger', 1909, II). 
Are there many people for whom a forest is not merely a collective noun and a 
rhetorical personification, i.e. a pure fiction, but something which is one and alive? . . 
. Real oneness is the oneness of self-consciousness. . . . Are there many who recognise 
the oneness of a forest, i.e. the living soul of the forest as an entity - the wood-spirit, 
the Old Nick? Do you consent to recognize undines and water-sprites - those souls of 
the aquatic element? 
The life activity of such composite beings as forests is not the same as the life 
activity of individual species of plants and animals, and the life activity of species is 
not the same as the life activity of separate individuals. 
To be more exact, the difference of functions expressed in different life activity 
points to the differences in the mental life of the different 'organisms'. The life activity 
of a separate birch leaf is naturally infinitely below the life activity of a tree', the life 
activity of a tree is not the same as that of a species; and the life of a species is not the 
same as the life of a forest. 
The functions of these four 'lives' are totally different, and so their intelligences must 
be correspondingly different too. 
The intelligence of an individual cell of the human body must be as much lower in 
comparison with the intelligence of the body, i.e. the 'physical mind of man', as its life 
activity is lower in comparison with the life activity of the whole organism. 
Thus, from a certain point of view, we may regard the noumenon of a phenomenon 
as the soul of that phenomenon; in other words we may say that the hidden soul of a 
phenomenon is its noumenon. The concept of the soul of a phenomenon or the 
noumenon of a phenomenon includes life and consciousness, and their functions in 
sections of the world incomprehensible to us - the manifestation of which in our sphere 
constitutes a phenomenon. 
The idea of an animate universe leads inevitably to the idea of the 'World Soul' — a 
'Being' whose manifestation is the visible universe.

[PAG 186]
The idea of the 'World Soul' was most picturesquely understood in ancient religions 
of India. The mystic poem, the Bhagavad Gita gives a wonderful image of Mahadeva, 
i.e. the great Deva, whose life is our world. 
Thus Krishna explained his doctrine to his disciples ... he gradually raised them to the 
sublime truths which had been opened out to himself in the lightning-flash of his 
vision. When he spoke of Mahadeva his voice became more serious in tone, and his 
countenance lit up. One day Arjuna, overcome by curiosity, asked boldly: 
'Show us Mahadeva in his divine form. Can our eyes behold him?' Then Krishna ... 
began to speak of the Being who breathes in all beings, of a hundred thousand shapes, 
countless eyes, and faces turning in every direction, who yet surpasses them all by the 
very height of infinity; who in his motionless and limitless body encloses the moving 
universe with all its divisions. 'If there were to burst forth simultaneously in the 
heavens the glory of a thousand suns,' said Krishna, 'it would bear but a faint 
resemblance to the splendour of the one All-Mighty.' As he thus spoke of Mahadeva, 
so glorious a ray of light beamed forth from Krishna's eyes that the disciples could not 
bear its brilliancy, but threw themselves down at his feet. Arjuna's hair stood on end, 
and with bowed head and clasped hands he said: 'Master, thy words terrify us, we 
cannot endure the sight of the great Being thou hast summoned up before us. It utterly 
confounds us.* 
In an interesting book of lectures by Professor James, A Pluralistic Universe, there 
is a lecture on Fechner, devoted to 'a conscious universe': 
Ordinary monistic idealism leaves everything intermediary out. It recognizes only the 
extremes, as if, after the first rude face of the phenomenal world in all its particularity, 
nothing but the supreme in all its perfection could be found. First, you and I, just as 
we are in this room; and the moment we get below that surface, the unutterable 
absolute itself! Doesn't this show a singularly indigent imagination? Isn't this brave 
universe made on a richer pattern, with room in it for a long hierarchy of beings? 
Materialistic science makes it infinitely richer in terms, with its molecules, and aether, 
and electrons, and what not. Absolute idealism, thinking of reality only under 
intellectual forms, knows not what to do with bodies of any grade, and can make no 
use of any psycho-physical analogy or correspondence.** 
Fechner, from whose writings Professor James makes extensive quotations, adopted 
quite a different point of view. Fechner's ideas 
* From E. Schure, The Great Initiates, trs. F. Rothwell, London, W. Rider, 1922, 
vol. I, reprinted New York, Multimedia, 1976, p. 123. 
** William James, A Pluralistic Universe, London, Longmans Green, 1909.

[PAG 187]
are so near to what was said in the previous chapters that we must dwell on them at 
greater length. 
I quote the words of Professor James: 
The original sin, according to Fechner, of both our popular and our scientific 
thinking, is our inveterate habit of regarding the spiritual not as the rule but as an 
exception in the midst of nature. Instead of believing our life to be fed at the breasts 
of the greater life, our individuality sustained by the greater individuality, which must 
necessarily have more consciousness and more independence than all that it brings 
forth, we habitually treat whatever lies outside of our life as so much slag and ashes 
of life only; 
or if we believe in a Divine Spirit, we fancy him on the one side as bodiless, and 
nature as soulless on the other. What comfort, or peace, Fechner asks, can come from 
such a doctrine? The flowers wither at its breath, the stars turn into stone; our own 
body grows unworthy of our spirit and sinks to a tenement for carnal senses only. 
The book of nature turns into a volume of mechanics, in which whatever has life is 
treated as a sort of anomaly; 
a great chasm of separation yawns between us and all that is higher than ourselves;  
and God becomes a thin nest of abstractions. 
Fechner's great instrument for verifying the daylight view is analogy. ... Bain defines 
genius as the power of seeing analogies. The number that Fechner could perceive was 
prodigious; but he insisted on the differences as well. Neglect to make allowances for 
these, he said, is the common fallacy in analogical reasoning. 
Fechner thus admits that, since every living body has a mind, so every mind must 
possess a body. But it does not follow that all bodies must be alike, and that the bodies 
of beings of a higher order should be like ours. Our body is adapted to the conditions of 
our life. Other conditions of life must engender other bodies. 
The vaster orders of mind go with vaster orders of body. The entire earth on which we 
live must have, according to Fechner, its own collective consciousness. So must each 
sun, moon and planet; so must the whole solar system have its own wider 
consciousness, in which the consciousness of our earth plays one part. So has the 
entire starry system as such its consciousness; and if that starry system be not the sum 
of all that is, materially considered, then the whole system, along with whatever else 
may be, is the body of that absolutely totalized consciousness of the universe to which 
men give the name of God. 
Speculatively, Fechner is thus a monist in his theology; but there is room in his 
universe for every grade of spiritual being 'between man and the final all-inclusive 
God'. . . . 
The earth-soul he passionately believes in; he treats the earth as our special human 
guardian angel; we can pray to the earth as men pray to their saints. 
His most important conclusion is, that the constitution of the world is identical 
throughout. In ourselves, visual consciousness goes with our

[PAG 188]
eyes, tactile consciousness with our skin. But although neither skin nor eye knows 
aught of the sensations of the other, they come together and figure in some sort of 
relation and combination in the more inclusive consciousness which each of us 
names his self. Quite similarly, then, says Fechner, we must suppose that my 
consciousness of myself and yours of yourself, although in their immediacy they 
keep separate and know nothing of each other, are yet known and used together in a 
higher consciousness, that of the human race, say, into which they enter as 
constituent parts. 
Similarly, the whole human and animal kingdoms come together as conditions of a 
consciousness of still wider scope. This combines in the soul of the earth with the 
consciousness of the vegetable kingdom, which in turn contributes its share of 
experience to that of the whole solar system, etc. 
The supposition of an earth-consciousness meets a strong instinctive prejudice. All 
the consciousness we directly know seems told to brains. But our brain, which 
primarily serves to correlate our muscular reactions with the external objects on 
which we depend, performs a function which the earth performs in an entirely 
different way. She has no proper muscles or limbs of her own, and the only objects 
external to her are the other stars. To these her whole mass reacts by most exquisite 
alterations in its total gait, and by still more exquisite vibratory responses in its 
substance. Her ocean reflects the lights of heaven as on a mighty mirror, her 
atmosphere refracts them like a monstrous lens, the clouds and snow-fields combine 
them into white, the woods and flowers disperse them into colours. Polarization, 
interference, absorption awaken sensibilities in matter of which our senses are too 
coarse to take any note. 
For these cosmic relations of hers, then, she no more needs a special brain than she 
needs eyes or ears. Our brains do indeed unify and correlate innumerable functions. 
Our eyes know nothing of sound, our ears nothing of light, but having brains we can 
feel sound and light together, and compare them. . . . Must every higher means of 
unification between things be a literal brain-fibre? Cannot the earth-mind know 
otherwise the contents of our minds together? 
In a striking page Fechner relates one of his moments of direct vision of truth. 
'On a certain morning I went out to walk. The fields were green, the birds sang, the 
dew glistened, the smoke was rising, here and there a man appeared, a light as of 
transfiguration lay on all things. It was only a little bit of earth; it was only one 
moment of her existence; and yet as my look embraced her more and more it seemed 
to be not only so beautiful an idea, but so true and clear a fact, that she is an angel ­
an angel carrying me along with her into Heaven. ... I asked myself how the opinions 
of men could ever have so spun themselves away from life as far as to deem earth 
only a dry clod. . . . But such an experience as this passes for fantasy. The earth is a 
globular body, and what more she may be, one can find in mineralogical cabinets.' 
The special thought of Fechner's is his belief that the more inclusive forms of 
consciousness are in part constituted by the more limited forms. Not that they are the 
mere sum of the more limited forms. As our mind is

[PAG 189]
not the bare sum of our sights plus our sounds plus our pains, but in adding these 
terms together it also finds relations among them and weaves them into schemes and 
forms and objects of which no one sense in its separate estate knows anything, so the 
earth-soul traces relations between the contents of my mind and the contents of yours 
of which neither of our separate minds is conscious. It has schemes, forms, and 
objects proportionate to its wider field, which our mental fields are far too narrow to 
cognize. By ourselves we are simply out of relation with each other, for we are both 
of us there, and different from each other. . . . What we are without knowing, it knows 
that we are. It is as if the total universe of inner life had a sort of grain of direction, a 
sort of valvular structure, permitting knowledge to flow in one way only, so that the 
wider might always have the narrower under observation, but never the narrower the 
wider. 
Fechner likens our individual persons on the earth unto so many sense-organs of 
the earth-soul. We add to its perceptive life. ... It absorbs our perceptions into its 
larger sphere of knowledge, and combines them with the other data there. The 
memories and conceptual relations that have spun themselves round the perceptions 
of a certain person remain in the larger earth-life as distinct as ever, and form new 
relations. . . . 
These ideas of Fechner's are expounded in his book, Zendavesta.* 
I have made such a long quotation from Professor James's book in order to show that 
ideas of the world as animated and intelligent are in no way new or paradoxical. It is a 
natural and logical necessity, springing from a wider view of the world than that which 
we usually permit ourselves. 
Logically we must either admit different levels of life and intelligence in everything, 
in all 'dead nature', or deny them altogether, even IN OURSELVES. 
* lbid.

[PAG 190]
CHAPTER 18  
Intelligence and life. Life and knowledge. Intellect and emotions. Emotion as an 
instrument of knowledge. The evolution of emotions from the standpoint of 
knowledge. Pure and impure emotions. Personal and super-personal emotions. The 
elimination of self-element as a means of approach to true knowledge. 'Be as little 
children. . . .' 'Blessed are the pure in heart. . . .' The value of morality from the 
standpoint of knowledge. The defects of intellectualism. 'Dreadnoughts' as the crown 
of intellectual culture. The dangers of moralism. Moral aestheticism. Religion and an 
as organized forms of emotional knowledge. The knowledge of GOD and the 
knowledge of BEAUTY. 
The MEANING OF LIFE - this is the eternal subject of human speculations. All 
philosophical systems, all religious teachings strive to find and give men an answer to 
the question: what constitutes the meaning of life? Some say that the meaning of life 
lies in our enjoyment of it 'while waiting for the final horror of death'. Others say that 
the meaning of life consists in self-improvement and creating for oneself a better future 
beyond the grave, or in future lives. A third group say that the meaning is in the 
approach to non-being. The fourth say that the meaning lies in the perfection of the 
race, in the 'ordering of life on earth'. The fifth deny all possibility of looking for a 
meaning, and so on. 
All these explanations suffer from one defect - they all try to find the meaning of life 
outside it - either in the future of mankind, or in the problematical existence after 
death, or in the evolution of the Ego through long successive reincarnations - always in 
something outside the present life of man. But if, instead of speculating, men would 
simply look within themselves, they would see that in actual fact the meaning of life is 
not, after all, so obscure. IT CONSISTS IN KNOWLEDGE. All life, by all its facts, events 
and accidents, agitations and attractions always leads us to the KNOWLEDGE OF 
SOMETHING. All life experience is KNOWLEDGE. The strongest emotion in man is a 
yearning for the unknown. EVEN IN LOVE, the strongest attraction to which everything 
else is sacrificed, is the attraction of the unknown, the NEW -curiosity.

[PAG 191]
The Persian poet-philosopher Al-Ghazzali says: 'The highest function of 
man's soul is the perception of truth.'* 
In the beginning of this book INNER LIFE and THE OUTER WORLD were 
recognized as existing. The world is everything that exists. The function of 
inner life may be defined as the realization of existence. 
Man realizes his existence and the existence of the world of which he is a 
part. His relation to himself and to the world is called knowledge. The 
broadening and deepening of the relation to oneself and the world is a 
broadening of knowledge.
All the mental faculties of man, all the elements of his inner life ­
sensations, representations, concepts, ideas, judgments, conclusions, feelings, 
emotions, even creation - all these are the instruments of knowledge which we 
possess. 
Feelings - from the simple emotions to the highest, such as aesthetic, 
religious and moral emotions - and creation, from the creation of a savage 
fashioning himself a stone hatchet, to the creation of Beethoven, are means of 
knowledge. Only to our narrow HUMAN view do they seem to serve other 
purposes - the protection of life, the creation of something, or enjoyment. In 
actual fact all this serves knowledge. 
Evolutionists, the followers of Darwin, will say that the struggle for 
existence and the selection of the fittest have created the mind and feeling of 
the modern man - that mind and feeling serve life, protect the life of separate
individuals or of the species and that, apart from this, in themselves, they
have no meaning. To this one can oppose the same argument as was used 
against the idea of the mechanicalness of the universe. Namely, if 
intelligence exists, then nothing exists except intelligence. The struggle for 
existence, and the survival of the fittest, if they in truth play such a role in the 
creation of life, are also not accidents, but products of an intelligence WHICH 
WE DO NOT KNOW. And, like everything else, they serve KNOWLEDGE. 
But we do not realize, do not see the presence of intelligence in the 
phenomena and laws of nature. This happens because we always study not 
the whole but a part, and we do not see the whole we wish to study. But 
studying the little finger of a man we cannot see the intelligence of the man. 
The same refers to nature. We always study the little finger of nature. If we 
realize this and understand that EVERY 
LIFE IS THE MANIFESTATION OF A PART OF SOME WHOLE, Only then a 
possibility opens of knowing that whole. 
In order to know the intelligence of a given whole, one should 
* Al-Ghazzali, 'The Alchemy of Happiness'.

[PAG 192]
understand the character of that whole, and its functions. Thus the function of 
man is knowledge and self-knowledge. But without understanding 'man' as a 
whole, it is impossible to understand his function. 
In order to understand what is our mind, the function of which is 
knowledge, it is necessary to make clear our relation to life. 
In Chapter 10 an attempt was made (based on an analogy with the world of 
imaginary two-dimensional beings), to define life as motion in a sphere
higher in comparison with a given sphere. From this point of view every 
separate life is, as it were, the manifestation in our sphere of a part of one of 
the intelligences of another sphere. These intelligences seem to look in on us 
by means of lives which we see. When a man dies, one eye of the universe 
closes, says Fechner. Every separate human life is a moment of the life of the 
great being which lives in us. Every separate life of a tree is a moment of the 
life of the being of the species or the variety. The intelligences of these 
higher beings do not exist independently of the lower lives. They are two 
sides of one and the same thing. Each single human mind, in some other 
section of the world may produce the illusion of many lives. 
It is very difficult to illustrate this by an example. But if we take Hinton's 
spiral, passing through a plane, and a point running in circles on the plane 
(Chapter 6, pp. 52-3) and suppose that the spiral is the mind, then the moving
point of intersection of the spiral with the plane would represent a life. This 
example illustrates the possible relation between mind and life. 
Life and mind seem to us different and separate from one another, because 
we do not know how to look, how to see. And this in its turn is due to the fact 
that it is very hard for us to get out of the framework of our divisions. We see 
the life of a tree, this tree. And if we are told that the life of the tree is a 
manifestation of some mind, we understand it to mean that the life of this tree 
is a manifestation of the mind of this tree. This, of course, is an absurdity 
resulting from our three-dimensional thinking, the 'Euclidean mind'. The life 
of this tree is a manifestation of the mind of the species or the variety, or 
perhaps of the intelligence of the whole vegetable kingdom. 
In the same way our individual lives are manifestations of some great
intelligence. Proof of this is found in the fact that our lives have no meaning
whatever apart from the process of acquiring knowledge. And a thoughtful 
man ceases to feel painfully the absence of meaning in life only when he 
realizes this and begins to strive consciously in that direction which he was 
unconsciously following before. 
Moreover, this acquisition of knowledge, which constitutes our

[PAG 193]
function in the world, is achieved not only by our intellect, but by our whole organism, 
all our body, all our life and the whole life of the human society, by its organizations, 
institutions, the whole culture and the whole civilization, by all we know in mankind 
and even more so by what we do not know. And we get to know that which we deserve 
to know. 
If we say about the intellectual side of man that its purpose is the acquisition of 
knowledge, this will not evoke any doubt. All are agreed that man's intellect, with all 
its subordinate functions, exists for the purpose of acquiring knowledge, although very 
often the faculty of knowledge is regarded as subordinate. But as regards the emotions: 
joy, sorrow, anger, fear, love, hate, pride, compassion, jealousy; as regards the sense of 
beauty, aesthetic sense and artistic creation; as regards moral sense; as regards all 
religious emotions: 
faith, hope, veneration and so on, as regards all human activity, things are not so clear. 
As a rule we do not see that all emotions and all human activity serve knowledge. In 
what way can fear or love or work serve knowledge? It seems to us that by emotions 
we feel, by work we create. Feeling and creation seem to us something different from 
knowledge. Concerning work, creation, the making of something, we are rather apt to 
think that they require knowledge and if they serve it, do so only indirectly. In the 
same way we cannot understand how religious emotions can serve knowledge. 
Usually the emotional is opposed to the intellectual: 'heart' is opposed to 'reason'. 
'Cold reason' or intellect is placed on one side, and on the other side: feelings, 
emotions, artistic sense; then, again quite separately, moral sense, religious feeling, 
'spirituality'. 
The misunderstanding here lies in the interpretation of the words intellect and 
emotion. 
Between intellect and emotion there is no sharp distinction. Intellect, taken as a 
whole, is also emotion. But in ordinary conversational language and in 'conversational 
psychology' reason is opposed to feeling; then comes will, placed as a separate and in­
dependent faculty; moralists place moral sense as something quite apart; religious 
people place spirituality or faith as something entirely separate. 
It is often said: reason conquered feeling; will conquered desire; 
the sense of duty overcame passion; spirituality conquered intellectuality; faith 
conquered reason. But all these are wrong expressions of conversational psychology, 
just as incorrect as the expressions 'sunrise' and 'sunset'. In the soul of man there is 
nothing but

[PAG 194]
emotions or their harmonious co-existence. This was clearly realized by
Spinoza when he said that an emotion can be overcome only by another, 
stronger emotion, and by nothing else. Reason, will, sense of duty, faith, 
spirituality, conquering some other emotion, can only conquer it by the 
emotional element contained in them. The ascetic who kills all desires and 
passions in himself, kills them by his desire for salvation. A man who 
renounces all worldly pleasures, renounces them for the sake of enjoying his 
sacrifice, his renunciation. A soldier who dies at his post through a sense of 
duty or habit of obedience does so because the emotion of devotion or 
faithfulness, or customary passivity are stronger in him than all the rest. A 
man whose moral sense tells him that he must overcome his passion, does so 
because moral sense (i.e. a certain emotion) is stronger in him than his other 
feelings, other emotions. Actually, all this is as clear and simple as the day,
and people get muddled only because, in calling different degrees of one and 
the same thing by different names, they begin to see fundamental differences 
where the difference is only that of degree. 
Will is the resultant of desires. We call strong-willed a man whose will 
follows a definite line without deviation from it, and we call weak-willed a 
man whose will follows a zig-zag course, deviating now in one, now in 
another direction under the influence of every new desire. But this does not 
mean that will and desire are two opposite things. On the contrary, they are
one and the same thing, because will is built up of desires. 
Reason cannot conquer feeling, because feeling can only be conquered by
feeling. Reason can only provide thoughts and images which would evoke 
feelings, and these conquer the feeling of the given moment. Spirituality is 
not something opposed to 'intellectuality' or 'emotionality'. It is only THEIR 
HIGHER FLIGHT. Reason has no bounds. Limitation is a characteristic that 
belongs only to the human 'Euclidean' mind - the intellect separated from 
emotions. 
What then is reason? 
Reason is the inner side of the life of every given being. In the living
kingdom of the earth, in all the animals lower than man, we see a passive 
reason. But with the appearance of concepts reason becomes active, and a 
part of it begins to work as intellect. An animal lives by sensations and 
emotions. In an animal the intellect is only in an embryonic state, as an 
emotion of curiosity, the pleasure of knowing.
In a man the growth of reason consists in the growth of the intellect and in 
the accompanying growth of higher emotions: aesthetic, religious, moral ­
which, as they grow, become more and more

[PAG 195]
intellectualized; moreover, simultaneously with this the intellect becomes impregnated 
with emotionality and ceases to be 'cold'. Thus 'spirituality' is the merging together of 
the intellect and the higher emotions. The intellect is spiritualized from the emotions; 
the emotions are spiritualized from the intellect. 
The functions of reason are not limited, but the human intellect does not often rise to 
its highest form. At the same time, it would again be incorrect to say that the highest 
human form of knowledge will no longer be intellectual, but will be something 
different; only this higher reason is entirely unrestricted by logical concepts and the 
Euclidean sphere. We shall hear a great deal about this from the side of mathematics 
which has actually transcended the domain of logic long ago. But it transcended it with 
the help of the intellect. New perception grows on the soil of the intellect and the 
higher emotions, but is not created by them. A tree grows from the earth, but is not 
created by the earth. A seed is necessary. This seed may or may not be in the soul. 
When it is there, it may be made to sprout or it may be choked; when it is not there, 
nothing else can take its place. And a soul (if it may be called soul) deprived of this 
seed, i.e. incapable of feeling and reflecting the world of the miraculous, will never 
produce a living shoot but will always reflect only the phenomenal world. 
At the present stage of his development, while man learns to know many things by 
means of the intellect, he also knows a great many things through emotions. Emotions 
are in no way instruments of feeling for the sake of feeling; they are all - instruments of 
knowledge. By every emotion man learns to know something he cannot know without 
its help - something he cannot know by any other emotion or by any effort of the 
intellect. If we consider the emotional nature of man as limited by itself, as serving life 
without serving knowledge, we shall never understand its true content and significance. 
Emotions serve knowledge. There are things and relations which can be known only 
emotionally and only through a given emotion. 
To understand the psychology of gambling it is necessary to feel the emotions of a 
gambler; to understand the psychology of the hunt it is necessary to feel the emotions of 
the hunter; the psychology of a man in love is incomprehensible to a man who is 
indifferent; the state of mind of Archimedes when he jumped out of the bath is 
incomprehensible to the placid citizen who thinks him insane; the feelings of a 
traveller, breathing in the sea air and gazing at the vast expanse of the sea, are 
incomprehensible to a man content with his sedentary life. The feelings of a believer 
are incomprehensible to an unbeliever, and

[PAG 196]
the feelings of an unbeliever are incomprehensible to a believer. The reason why men 
understand one another so little is that they always live by different emotions. And they 
understand one another only when they happen simultaneously to experience identical 
emotions. Popular wisdom is well aware of this fact: 'A FULL MAN DOES NOT 
UNDERSTAND A HUNGRY ONE', it says; 'a drunken man is no companion for a sober 
one'; 'birds of a feather flock together'. 
In this mutual understanding, or in the illusion of a mutual understanding from being 
immersed in similar emotions, lies one of the main charms of love. Guy de Maupassant 
expressed this very well in his short sketch 'Solitude'. In this same illusion lies the 
secret of the power of alcohol over human souls, because alcohol produces the illusion 
of communion of souls and stimulates fantasy simultaneously in two or more people. 
Emotions are the stained-glass windows of the soul, coloured windows, through 
which the soul looks at the world. Each of these windows helps to discover certain 
colours in the object under examination, but at the same time it conceals the 
contrasting ones. Consequently the saying is quite correct that a one-sided emotional 
illumination can never give a right idea of an object. Nothing gives one such a clear 
idea of things as the emotions, and nothing misleads one as much as the emotions. 
Each emotion has its own purpose of existence; but the cognitive value of emotions 
is different. There are emotions which are necessary, important, indispensable for a life 
of knowledge - and there are emotions which hinder rather than help understanding. 
Theoretically all emotions serve knowledge: all emotions arise as a consequence of 
the cognition of one or another thing. Let us take one of the most elementary emotions, 
say the EMOTION OF FEAR. Undoubtedly there are relations which can be known only 
through fear. A man who has never experienced fear will never understand many 
things in life and in nature; he will not understand many of the principal motives of the 
life of mankind. What else but the fear of hunger and cold forces the majority of men 
to work? He will fail to understand a great many relations in the animal kingdom. For 
instance, he will never understand the essence of the relationship of mammals to 
reptiles. A snake evokes a feeling of repulsion and fear in all mammals. Through this 
repulsion and fear a mammal learns to know the nature of the snake and the relation of 
that nature to its own, and the knowledge it thus gains is quite correct, but strictly 
personal, only from its own point of view. What the snake is in itself - not in the 
philosophical sense of a thing in itself, but simply from the point of

[PAG 197]
view of zoology (and not from the point of view of a man or an animal whom 
the snake has bitten or may bite) - this MAY BE KNOWN ONLY 
BY THE INTELLECT. 
Emotions are connected with the different 'I's of our mental life. An emotion which 
looks exactly the same at the first glance, may be connected with very small 'I's or with 
very big 'I's. And, in accordance with this, the role and significance of that emotion in 
man's life may be very different. The establishment of a permanent 'I' is hindered 
principally by a constant changing of emotions, each of which calls itself 'I' and strives 
to seize power over man. And this is a particularly great hindrance when emotions arise 
and develop in those realms of the inner life which are connected with a certain kind of 
self-awareness or self-affirmation. These are the so-called personal emotions. 
The sign of the growth of the emotions is their liberation from the personal element 
and their transition to higher planes. The liberation from personal elements enhances 
the cognitive power of emotions, because the more personal elements there are in an 
emotion, the more capable it is of leading into delusion. A personal emotion is always 
biased, always unfair, if only for the reason that it opposes itself to everything else. 
Thus the cognitive power of an emotion is proportionately greater when a given 
emotion contains less self-element, i.e. when there is a stronger realization that the 
given emotion is not 'I'. 
We have seen earlier in studying space and its laws that the evolution of knowledge 
consists in a gradual withdrawal from oneself. Hinton expresses it very well. He says 
all the time that only by withdrawing from self do we begin to understand the world as 
it is. The whole system of mental exercises with multi-coloured cubes, worked out by 
Hinton, aims at the training of a consciousness which will look at things not from a 
pseudo-personal point of view: 
When we study a block of cubes [say a cube composed of 27 smaller 