=== Tertium Organum (P. D. Ouspensky).pdf — CHUNK 14/18 ===
Chars: 43,421 | Offset: 576,238



[PAG 233]
into philosophical systems - but in some strange way it was not recognized as LOGIC. 
The system of this logic can be deduced from a great many philosophical systems. I 
find the most exact and the fullest formulation of this logic in Plotinus, in his treatise 
'On Intelligible Beauty'. I shall quote this passage in the following chapter. 
I have called the system of higher logic 'TERTIUM ORGANUM', because for us it is the 
third instrument or the third law of thought after Aristotle and Bacon. The first was 
ORGANON, the second NOVUM ORGANUM. But the third existed before the first. 
A man possessing this key can open the doors of the world of causes without fear. 
The axioms which Tertium Organum contains cannot be formulated in our language. 
But if we still try to formulate them, they will produce the impression of absurdities. 
Taking the axioms of Aristotle as a model, we may express the principal axiom of the 
new logic in our poor earthly language in the following way: 
A is both A and not A, or 
Every thing is both A and not A, or 
Every thing is All. 
But in fact these formulae are completely impossible. And they are not axioms of 
higher logic; they are merely attempts to express the axioms of this logic in concepts. 
In reality the ideas of higher logic are inexpressible in concepts. And when we come up 
against this in-expressibility, it means that we have come into contact with the world of 
causes. 
The logical formula A is both A and not A corresponds to the mathematical formula: 
a magnitude can be greater or lesser than itself. 
The absurdity of both these propositions shows that they cannot refer to our world. 
Naturally, absurdity does not, by itself, indicate that a thing belongs to noumena. But 
the fact of belonging to noumena will necessarily be expressed for us in absurdity. To 
hope to find anything in the world of causes that would be logical from our point of 
view is just as useless as to think that the world of things can exist in accordance with 
the laws of the world of shadows, or stereometry in accordance with the laws of 
planimetry. 
To master the main principles of higher logic means to master the

[PAG 234]
fundamentals of the understanding of higher-dimensional space or the world of the 
miraculous. 
In order to come to a clear understanding of the relations of the many-dimensional 
world, we must get rid of all the 'idols' of our world (to use Bacon's expression); in 
other words we must get rid of all the obstacles to a right perception and thinking. And 
above all we must have an inner kinship with the world of the miraculous. 
In order to come to the understanding of the three-dimensional world, a two­
dimensional being must already be three-dimensional, and then get free of its 'idols', 
i.e. of its accepted ways of feeling and thinking, which have become axiomatic and are 
creating for it the illusion of two-dimensionality. 
What exactly must a two-dimensional being get rid of? 
First of all - and this is most important - it must get rid of the conviction that what it 
sees and senses actually exists; and as a result it must become aware of the 
incorrectness of its representation of the world, and then of the idea that the real, new 
world must exist in some quite different forms, new, incomparable, incommensurable 
with the old. Further, the two-dimensional being must get rid of the assurance that its 
divisions are correct. It must understand that things which appear to it totally different 
and separated one from another, may be a part of some whole incomprehensible to it, 
or that they may have much in common, although this may not be noticed; whereas 
things which seem one and indivisible, are actually infinitely complex and manifold. 
The mental growth of the two-dimensional being must proceed along the line of the 
recognition of those common properties of objects, unknown to it before, which result 
from their similar origin or similar functions, incomprehensible on a plane. 
Once the two-dimensional being has recognized the possible existence of common 
properties, formerly unknown to it, in objects which appear different, it has already 
come near to our understanding of the world. It has come near to our logic, has begun 
to understand the use of a collective noun, i.e. a word which is not a proper name but a 
common noun; in other words, a word expressing a concept. 
The 'idols' of the two-dimensional being which obstruct the development of its 
consciousness are proper names which itself it gives to all surrounding objects. For it 
every object has its own proper name, corresponding to its own representation of that 
object; it has no common nouns corresponding to concepts. It is only by getting rid of 
these 'idols' and understanding that nouns may be both proper and common that it will 
be able to advance further, to develop mentally, to

[PAG 235]
approach the human understanding of the world. Otherwise, the simplest sentence, such 
as: 
John and Peter are both men 
will be an absurdity for a two-dimensional being. In its own representation it will take 
approximately the following form: 
John and Peter are both John and Peter. 
In other words, every logical proposition of ours will seem an absurdity to it. It is 
clear why this should be so. It has no concepts; 
proper names which make up its speech, have no plural. It is clear that the plural of our 
speech will seem to it an absurdity. 
But where are our 'idols'? What must we get rid of in order to pass on to the 
understanding of relations in the many-dimensional world? 
First of all we must get rid of the conviction that we see and sense that which 
actually exists and that the real world is similar to the world we see. In other words, we 
must get rid of the illusion of the material world. We must understand with mind all the 
illusory nature of the world we perceive in time and space and understand that the real 
world can have nothing in common with it. We must understand that we cannot 
represent to ourselves the real world in forms; and then we must understand the 
conditional nature of the axioms of our mathematics and logic relating to the unreal, 
phenomenal world. 
In mathematics the idea of infinity will help us to do this. The unreality of finite 
magnitudes as compared with the infinite is self-evident. In logic we may base our 
thought on the idea of monism, i.e. the fundamental unity of everything existing, and 
consequently adopt as our starting point the impossibility of constructing any axioms 
consisting of contrapositions, theses and antitheses, on which our logic is based. 
The logic of Aristotle and Bacon is fundamentally dualistic. If we are deeply imbued 
with the idea of monism, we shall conquer the 'idol' of this logic. 
The fundamental axioms of our logic may be reduced to identity and contradiction, 
in the same way as mathematical axioms. At the basis of them all lies the acceptance of 
one general axiom, namely, that every given something has something opposite to it. 
Consequently, every proposition has its contra-position, every thesis has its antithesis. 
To the being of every thing is opposed the non-being of that thing. To the being of the 
world is opposed the non-being of the world. Object is opposed to subject. Objective 
world - to the sub-

[PAG 236]
jective world. Not 'I' is opposed to 'I'. Immobility - to motion. Variability - to 
constancy. Multiformity - to unity. Falsehood - to truth. Evil - to good. And, in 
conclusion, to every A in general is opposed not A. 
The recognition of the reality of these divisions is necessary for the acceptance of the 
fundamental axioms of the logic of Aristotle and Bacon. In other words, this logic 
requires an absolute and incontestable acceptance of the idea of the duality of the world 
- dualism. The recognition of the unreality of these divisions and of the unity of all 
opposites is necessary for the beginning of understanding of higher logic. 
In the very beginning of this book the existence of the WORLD and of INNER LIFE was 
'admitted', in other words, the reality of a dual division of everything existing, because 
all other contrapositions are derived from this contraposition. Duality is the condition 
of our perception of the phenomenal (three-dimensional) world; it is the instrument of 
our perception of phenomena. But when we come to the perception of the noumenal 
world (or the world of many dimensions), this duality begins to stand in our way, to 
become an obstacle to knowledge. 
Dualism is the chief 'idol' we have to get rid of. 
In order to understand the relations of things in three dimensions and in our logic, a 
two-dimensional being must renounce the 'idol' of the absolute uniqueness of objects 
which requires it to call things only by their proper names. 
We, in order to understand the world of many dimensions, must renounce the idol of 
duality. 
But an application of monism to practical thinking comes up against the 
insurmountable obstacle of our language. Our language is incapable of expressing the 
unity of opposites, just as it is incapable of expressing spatially the relation of cause 
and effect. Consequently, we should be prepared to find that all attempts to express 
super-logical relations in our language will appear absurd, and actually will only hint at 
what we wish to convey. 
Thus the formula: 
A is both A and not A or 
Everything is both A and not A 
representing the fundamental axiom of higher logic, as expressed in our language of 
concepts, sounds an absurdity from the point of view of our ordinary logic, and is 
essentially untrue.

[PAG 237]
We must be prepared for the fact that it is impossible to express superlogical 
relations in our language. 
The formula 'A is both A and not A' is untrue because in the world of causes the 
very contraposition of 'A' and 'not A' does not exist But we cannot express their real 
relation. It would be more correct to say, 
A is all 
But this also would be untrue, because A is not only all, but also any part of all, and 
at the same time a given part 
This is exactly what our language cannot express And it is exactly to this that we 
must tram and accustom our thought. 
We must become accustomed to the thought that separateness and combination are 
not opposites in the real world, but exist together and at the same time, without 
contradicting each other. We must realize that in the real world the same thing can be 
both a part and the whole, i.e. that the whole, without changing, can be its own part. 
We must understand in general that there are no contrapositions and that each thing is 
a certain archetype of the all. 
Having begun to understand this we shall begin to grasp separate ideas concerning 
the essence of the 'noumenal world' or the world of many dimensions in which we 
actually live. 
In such a case the higher logic, even with the imperfect formulae -crude as they may 
appear in our language of concepts - represents a powerful instrument of cognition of 
the world, the only means of preserving us from illusions. 
The application of this instrument of thought gives the key to the mysteries of 
nature, to the world as it is. 
Let us try to enumerate the properties of the WORLD OF CAUSES which may be derived 
from everything said so far. 
It is first of all necessary to emphasize that it is impossible to express in words the 
properties of the world of causes. Every thought which is expressed about them will be 
untrue. It can be said about the real world that (in relation to it) 'a thought expressed in 
words, is a lie'. One can speak about it only conditionally, approximately, by hints, by 
symbols. And, if anything said about it is understood literally, it will become an 
absurdity. Generally speaking, everything expressed in words about the world of 
causes may seem absurd and is actually already a distortion. Truth cannot be 
expressed. The most one can do is to hint at it, to give an impetus to the thought. But 
everyone must find truth for himself, by himself. 'Someone else's' truth is worse than a 
lie, because it is - two lies. This also explains why truth can

[PAG 238]
only be expressed in the form of a paradox, or even in the form of a lie. To speak of 
truth without lies we must know some other language. Our language is not suitable. 
What then can we say in our language about the world of many dimensions, the 
world of noumena or the world of causes? 
1 In this world 'TIME' must exist spatially, i.e. time events must exist and not take 
place. In other words, they must exist both before and after their accomplishment and 
lie, as it were, on the same plane. Effects must exist simultaneously with causes. What 
we call the law of causation cannot exist there, because the necessary condition for it is 
— time. There can be nothing there measurable by years, days and hours. There can be 
no before, now and after. Moments of different epochs, divided by long stretches of 
time, exist simultaneously and may be adjacent. At the same time all the possibilities of 
a given moment, even those opposed to one another, together with all their results ad 
infinitum, must become realized simultaneously with the given moment. But the length 
of the moment may be different on different planes. 
2 There is nothing there measurable by our measures, nothing commensurable with 
our solids, nothing that is more or less than our solids. There is nothing lying to the 
right or the left, above or below our solids. Nothing resembling our solids, lines or 
figures. Yet, at the same time, all this may be. Different points of our space divided for 
us by long distances, must be adjacent there. 'Proximity' or 'distance' are determined 
there by inner 'affinity' or 'divergence', by sympathy or antipathy, i.e. by properties 
which seem to us subjective. 
3 There is no matter there, nor motion. There is nothing that may be weighed or 
photographed, or expressed in formulae of physical energy. There is nothing that has 
form, colour or smell. Nothing possessing the qualities of physical bodies. At the same 
time, with the understanding of certain laws, the properties of the world of causes may 
be studied in the categories which have been enumerated. 
4 There is nothing dead or unconscious there. Everything lives, everything breathes, 
everything thinks, everything feels, everything is conscious and everything speaks. 
5 Axioms of our mathematics cannot be applied in that world, because there is 
nothing finite there. Everything there is infinite and, from our point of view, variable. 
6 Laws of our logic cannot operate there. From the point of view of our logic that 
world is outside logic. It is the domain the laws of which are expressed in TERTIUM 
ORGANUM. 
7 The multiplicity of our world cannot exist there. Everything is

[PAG 239]
the whole. And every separate speck of dust, let alone every separate life and 
every conscious being, lives one life with the whole and includes all the 
whole in itself. 
8 In that world there can be none of the duality of our world. Being there is 
not opposed to non-being. Life is not opposed to death. On the contrary, the 
one includes the other. Unity and multiplicity, motion and immobility; 
oneness and divisibility, good and evil, truth and falsehood - all these 
divisions are impossible there. Everything subjective is objective, and 
everything objective is subjective. That world is the world of the unity of 
opposites. 
9 The sense of the reality of that world must be accompanied by a sense of 
the unreality of this world. At the same time no difference between the real 
and the unreal can exist there, just as there cannot be any difference between 
the subjective and the objective. 
10 That world and our world are not two different worlds. The world is 
one. That which we call our world is only our incorrect representation of the 
world, the world seen through a narrow slit. We begin to sense that world as 
the miraculous, i.e. as something opposed to the reality of this world. At the 
same time this world, the earthly world, begins to appear unreal. 
11 But everything said so far will not define our relation to that world, so 
long as we do not realize that even in comprehending it we will not embrace 
it in its entirety, i.e. in all the variety of relations existing within it, but will 
think of it only in one or another aspect. 
12 What has been said about the world of causes refers also to the All. But 
between the world and the All there may be many transitional stages.

[PAG 240]
CHAPTER 22  
Theosophy of Max Muller Ancient India Philosophy of the Vedanta Tat tvam asi 
Perception by expanded consciousness as a reality Mysticism of different ages and 
peoples Similarity of experiences Tertium Organum as a key to mysticism Signs of 
the noumenal world Treatise of Plotinus 'On Intelligible Beauty' as a system of higher 
logic which is not understood Illumination of Jacob Boehme 'A harp of many strings, 
of which each string is a separate instrument, while the whole is only one harp' 
Mysticism of the Philokalia, St Avva Dorotheus and others Clement of Alexandria 
Lao-Tzu and Chuang-Tzu Light on the Path and The Voice of the Silence 
Mohammedan mystics Poetry of the Sufis Mystical states under narcotics The 
Anaesthetic Revelation Professor James's experiments Dostoyevsky on 'time' (The 
Idiot) Influence of nature on the soul of man 
It would have been very interesting and highly important to make an 
historical survey of the development of ideas and systems based on higher
logic, or derived from it. But it is extremely difficult, almost impossible, to 
do this, because, after all, we know nothing about the time of origin, the 
methods of transmission or ways of handing down of ideas of ancient 
philosophical systems and religious teachings There are a great many guesses 
and suppositions concerning the ways of handing down of ideas Many of 
these guesses and suppositions were considered beyond doubt, until new 
suppositions arose to refute them. Opinions of investigators are very
divergent about many questions and, generally, it would be extremely
difficult, or even impossible, to find one's way in this chaos, if one were to 
rely only upon the material accessible to logical investigation 
I shall not dwell at all on the question of the handing down of ideas, either 
from historical or from any other point of view 
Moreover, my survey of systems referring to the world of causes does not 
pretend to be complete It is not a 'history of thought', but merely some 
examples of different trends of thought which have led to similar results. 
In his book Theosophy or Psychological Religion the well-known scholar 
Max Muller gives a very interesting analysis of mystical

[PAG 241]
religions and philosophical systems akin to them. He pays special attention to India 
and its teachings. 
What we study nowhere but in India is the all-absorbing influence which religion and 
philosophy may exercise on the human mind. So far as we can judge, a large class of 
people in India, not only the priestly class, but the nobility also, not only men but 
women also, never looked upon their life on earth as something real. What was real to 
them was the invisible, the life to come. What formed the themes of their 
conversations, what formed the subject of their meditations, was the real that alone 
lent some kind of reality to this unreal phenomenal world. Whoever was supposed to 
have caught a new ray of truth was visited by young and old, was honoured by 
princes and kings, nay, was looked upon as holding a position far above that of kings 
and princes. That is the side of the life of ancient India which deserves our study, 
because there has been nothing like it in the whole world, not even in Greece or in 
Palestine. . . . 
I know quite well [says Müller] that there can never be a whole nation of 
philosophers or metaphysical dreamers . . . and we must never forget that, all 
through history, it is the few, not the many, who impress their character on a nation, 
and have a right to represent it, as a whole. What do we know of Greece at the time 
of the Ionian and Eleatic philosophers, except the utterances of Seven Sages? What 
do we know of the Jews at the time of Moses, except the traditions preserved in the 
Laws and the Prophets? It is the prophets, the poets, the lawgivers and teachers, 
however small their number, who speak in the name of the people, and who alone 
stand out to represent the nondescript multitude behind them, to speak their thoughts 
and to express their sentiments. . . . 
Real Indian philosophy, even in that embryonic form in which we find it in the 
'Upanishads' stands completely by itself. ... If we ask what was the highest purpose 
of the teaching of the 'Upanishads' we can state it in three words, as it has been 
stated by the greatest Vedânta* teachers themselves, namely Tat tvam asi. This 
means Thou art that. That stands for what... is known to us under different names in 
different systems of ancient philosophy. It is Zeus or the Eis Theos or to on in 
Greece; it is what Plato meant by the Eternal Idea, what agnostics call the 
Unknowable, what I call the Infinite in Nature. This is what in India is called 
Brahman. . .the being behind all beings, the power that emits the universe, sustains it 
and draws it back again to itself. The Thou is ... the Infinite in Man . . . the Soul, the 
Self, the being behind every human Ego, free from all bodily fetters, free from 
passions, free from all attachments [Âtman]. The expression Thou art That means: 
Thine Âtman, thy soul, thy self is the Brahman, . . or in other words, the subject and 
object of being and all knowing are one and the same. 
This is the gist of what I call Psychological Religion, or Theosophy, the highest 
summit of thought which the human mind has reached, which has found different 
expressions in different religions and philosophies, but nowhere such a clear and 
powerful realization as in the ancient 'Upanishads' of India. 
* Vedanta is the end of the Vedas, the synopsis and commentaries to the Vedas.

[PAG 242]
For as long as the individual soul does not free itself from Nescience, or a belief in 
duality, it takes something else for itself. True knowledge of the Self, or true self­
knowledge, expresses itself in the words, 'Thou art That' or 'I am Brahman', the 
nature of Brahman being unchangeable eternal cognition. Until that stage has been 
reached, the individual soul is fettered by the body, by the organs of sense, nay even 
by the mind and its various functions. 
The Self, says the Vedanta philosopher, cannot be different from Brahman, 
because Brahman comprehends all reality, and nothing that really is can therefore be 
different from Brahman. Secondly, the individual self cannot be conceived as a 
modification of Brahman, because Brahman by itself cannot be changed, whether by 
itself, because it is one and perfect in itself, or by anything outside it [because 
nothing exists outside it]. Here we see the Vedântist moving in exactly the same 
stratum of thought in which the Eleatic philosophers moved in Greece. 'If there is 
one Infinite,' they said, 'there cannot be another, for the other would limit the one, 
and thus render it finite.' Or, as applied to God, the Eleatics argued, 'If God is to be 
the mightiest and the best, he must be one, for if there were two or more, he would 
not be the mightiest and best.' The Eleatics continued their monistic argument by 
showing that this One Infinite Being cannot be divided, so that anything could be 
called a portion of it, because there is no power that could separate anything from it. 
Nay, it cannot even have parts, for, as it has no beginning and no end, it can have no 
parts, for a part has a beginning and an end. 
These Eleatic ideas - namely, that there is and there can be only One Absolute 
Being, infinite, unchangeable, without a second, without parts and passions - are the 
same ideas which underlie the 'Upanishads' and have been fully worked out in the 
Vedânta-Sutras. 
In most of the religions of the ancient world [says Müller] the relation between the 
soul and God has been represented as a return of the soul to God. A yearning for 
God, a kind of divine home-sickness, finds expression in most religions. But the 
road that is to lead us home, and the reception which the soul may expect in the 
Father's house, have been represented in very different ways, in different countries 
and different languages. . . . 
According to some religious teachers, a return of the soul to God is possible after 
death only. . . . 
According to other religious teachers, the final beatitude of the soul can be 
achieved even in this life. . . . That beatitude . . . requires knowledge only, 
knowledge of the necessary unity of what is divine in man with what is divine in 
God. The Brahmans call it self-knowledge, that is to say, the knowledge that our 
true self, if it is anything, can only be that Self which is All in All, and beside which 
there is nothing else. Sometimes this conception of the intimate relation between the 
human and the divine natures comes in suddenly, as the result of an unexplained 
intuition or self-recollection. Sometimes, however, it seems as if the force of logic 
had driven the human mind to the same result. If God had once been recognized as 
the Infinite in nature, and the soul as the Infinite in man, it seemed to follow that 
there could not be two Infinites. The Eleatics had clearly passed through a similar 
phase of thought in their own philosophy.

[PAG 243]
'If there is an Infinite,' they said, 'it is one, for if there were two, they could not be 
infinite, but would be finite one towards the other. But that which exists is infinite, 
and there cannot be more such. Therefore that which exists is one. ' 
Nothing can be more decided than Eleatic Monism, and with it the admission of a 
soul, the Infinite in man, as different from God, the Infinite in nature, would have 
been inconceivable. 
In India. . . . the conclusion was. . . . that these two. Brahman and Atman [the 
spirit] were in their nature one. 
The early Christians, also, at least those who had been brought up in the schools 
of Neo-platomst philosophy, had a clear perception that, if the soul is infinite and 
immortal in its nature, it cannot be anything beside God or by the side of God, but 
that it must be God and in God St. Paul gave but his own bold expression to the 
same faith or knowledge, when he uttered the words which have startled so many 
theologians: 'In Him we live and move and have our being.' If anyone else had 
uttered these words, they would at once have been condemned as pantheism. No 
doubt they are pantheism, and yet they express the very key-note of Christianity. The 
divine sonship of man is only a metaphorical expression, but it was meant originally 
to embody the same idea. . . . And when the question was asked how the 
consciousness of this divine sonship could ever have been lost, the answer given by 
Christianity was, by sin, the answer given by the 'Upanishads' was, by avidyâ 
nescience. This marks the similarity, and at the same time the characteristic 
difference between these two religions. The question how nescience laid hold of the 
human soul, and made it imagine that it could live or move or have a true being 
anywhere but in Brahman, remains as unanswerable in Hindu philosophy as in 
Christianity the question how sin first came into the world. 
Both philosophies, that of the East and that of the West, start from a common point, 
namely from the conviction that our ordinary knowledge is uncertain, if not 
altogether wrong. This revolt of the human mind against itself is the first step in all 
philosophy. 
In our own philosophical language we might express the same question by asking, 
how did the real become phenomenal and how can the phenomenal become real 
again, or, in other words, how was the infinite changed into the finite, how was the 
eternal changed into the temporal, and how can the temporal regain its eternal nature, 
or, to put it into more familiar language, how was this world created, and how can it 
be uncreated again. 
Nescience or avidyâ is the cause of phenomenal semblance. . . . 
In the 'Upanishads' the meaning of Brahman changes Sometimes he is almost an 
objective God, existing separately from the world Then we see] Brahman the 
essence of all things, and the soul, knowing that it is no longer separated from that 
essence, learns the highest lesson of the whole Vedanta doctrine, tat tvam asi. Thou 
art That, that is to say, 'Thou who for a time didst seem to be something by thyself, 
art that, art really nothing apart from the divine essence' To know Brahman is to be 
Brahman. 
Almost in the same words as the Eleatic philosophers and the German mystics of 
the fourteenth century, the Vedantist argues that it would be

[PAG 244]
self-contradictory to admit that there could be anything besides the Infinite or 
Brahman, which is All in All, and that therefore the soul also cannot be anything 
different from it, can never claim a separate and independent existence. 
Secondly, as Brahman has to be conceived as perfect, and therefore as 
unchangeable, the soul cannot be conceived as a real modification or deterioration of 
Brahman. 
Thirdly, as Brahman has neither beginning nor end, neither can it have any parts, 
therefore the soul cannot be a part of Brahman, but the whole of Brahman must be 
present in every individual soul. This is the same as the teaching of Plotinus, who 
held with equal consistency that the True Being is totally present in every part of the 
universe. . . . 
The Vedanta philosophy rests on the fundamental conviction. . . . that the Soul and 
the Absolute Being or Brahman, are one in their essence. 
The fundamental principle of the Vedanta philosophy is that in reality there exists 
and can exist nothing but Brahman, that Brahman is everything. 
In India, as anywhere else, man imagines at first that he, in his individual, bodily 
and spiritual character, is something that exists, and that all the objects of the outer 
world also exist, as objects. Idealistic philosophy has swept away this world-old 
prejudice more thoroughly in India than anywhere else. 
Nescience [creating the division between the individual soul and Brahman] can be 
removed by science or knowledge only, and this knowledge or vidya is imparted by 
the Vedanta, which shows that all our ordinary knowledge is simply the result of 
ignorance or nescience, is uncertain, deceitful and perishable, or as we should say, is 
phenomenal, relative, and conditioned. The true knowledge, or complete insight, 
cannot be gained by sensuous perception, nor by inference. . . . According to the 
orthodox Vedantist, Sruti alone, or what is called revelation, can impart that 
knowledge and remove that nescience which is innate in human nature. 
Of the Higher Brahman nothing can be predicated but that it is, and that through 
our nescience, it appears to be this or that. 
When a great Indian Sage was asked to describe Brahman, he was simply silent ­
that was his answer. 
When it is said that Brahman is, that means at the same time that Brahman is not, 
that is to say, that Brahman is nothing of what is supposed to exist in our sensuous 
perceptions. 
Whatever we may think of this philosophy [says Müller], we cannot deny its 
metaphysical boldness and its logical consistency. If Brahman is All in All, the One 
without a second, nothing can be said to exist that is not Brahman. There is no room 
for anything outside the Infinite and the Universal, nor is there room for two 
Infinites, for the Infinite in nature and the Infinite in man. There is and there can be 
one Infinite, one Brahman only. This is the beginning and the end of the Vedanta. . . 
. 
What has often been quoted as the shortest summary of the Vedanta in a couple of 
lines, represents the Vedanta of Sankara [a commentator and interpreter of Vedanta]

[PAG 245]
'Brahma is true, the world is false, The soul is 
Brahma and is nothing else.' 
This is really a very perfect summary. It means: What truly and really exists is 
Brahman, the One Absolute Being; the world is false, or rather is not what it seems 
to be; that is, everything that is presented to us by the senses is phenomenal and 
relative, and can be nothing else. The soul again, or rather every man's soul... is in 
reality nothing but Brahman. 
[In relation to the question of the origin of the world, two famous commentators of 
the Vedânta,] Sankara and Râmânuga differ, Râmânuga holding the theory of 
evolution, Sankara the theory of illusion. . . . 
It is very important to observe that the Vedântist does not go as far as certain 
Buddhist philosophers who look upon the phenomenal world as simply nothing. No, 
their world is real, only it is not what it seems to be. Sankara claims for the 
phenomenal world a reality sufficient for all practical purposes, sufficient to 
determine our practical life, our moral obligations. . . . 
There is a veil. But the Vedânta-philosophy teaches us that the eternal light behind 
it can always be perceived more or less darkly or more or less clearly, through 
philosophical knowledge. It can be perceived because in reality it is always there. . . . 
It may seem strange to find the results of the philosophy of Kant and his followers 
thus anticipated under varying expressions in the 'Upanishads' and in the Vedânta­
philosophy of ancient India. 
In the chapters on the 'Logos' and on 'Christian Theosophy' Max Müller says that 
RELIGION is a bridge between the Visible and the Invisible, between the Finite and the 
Infinite. 
It may be truly said that the founders of the religions of the world have all been 
bridge-builders. As soon as the existence of the Beyond, of a Heaven above the earth, 
of Powers above us and beneath us had been recognized, a great gulf seemed to be 
fixed between what was called by various names, the earthly and the heavenly, the 
material and the spiritual, the phenomenal and noumenal, or best of all, the visible 
and invisible world, and it was the chief object of religion to unite these two worlds 
again, whether by the arches of hope and fear, or by the iron chains of logical 
syllogisms.* 
The idea of the 'Logos' represented precisely this bridge. It assumed the most varied 
forms, expressing the first divine thought, and then became personified and 
transformed into the Son of God, incarnated on earth. Moreover, this idea gathered 
round it the mythological elements of ancient religions. 
Among modern thinkers, the well-known psychologist Professor 
* F. Max Müller, Theosophy or Psychological Religion, New York, 
Longmans Green, 1899.

[PAG 246]
William James is closest of all to the ideas of Max Müller's Theosophy. In the last 
chapter of his book, The Varieties of Religious Experience, Professor James says: 
The warring gods and formulas of the various religions do indeed cancel each other, 
but there is a certain uniform deliverance in which religions all appear to meet — [this 
is the LIBERATION OF THE SOUL]. Man becomes conscious that his higher part is 
conterminous and continuous with a MORE of the same quality which is operative in 
the universe outside of him, and which he can keep in working touch with, and in a 
fashion get on board of and save himself when all his lower being has gone to pieces 
in the wreck. . . . 
What is the objective 'truth' of the content of religious experiences? ... Is such a 
'more' merely our own notion, or docs it really exist? If so, in what shape does it 
exist? . . . And in what form should we conceive of that 'union' with it of which 
religious geniuses are so convinced? 
It is in answering these questions that the various theologies perform their 
theoretical work, and that their divergencies most come to light. They all agree that 
the 'more' really exists; though some of them hold it to exist in the shape of a 
personal god or gods, while others are satisfied to conceive it as a stream of ideal 
tendency. ... It is when they treat of the experience of 'union' with it that their 
speculative differences appear most clearly. Over this point pantheism and theism, 
nature and second birth, works and grace and karma, immortality and reincarnation . 
. . carry on inveterate disputes. 
I held out the notion [says Professor James] that an impartial science of religions 
might sift out from the midst of their discrepancies a common body of doctrine 
which she might also formulate in terms to which physical science need not object. 
This, I said, she [the science of religions] might adopt as her own reconciling 
hypothesis, and recommend it for general belief. . . . 
Let me then propose, as an hypothesis, that whatever it may be on its farther side, the 
'more' with which in religious experience we feel ourselves connected is on its hither 
side the subconscious continuation of our conscious life. . . . 
The conscious person is continuous with a wider self. . . . The further limits of our 
being plunge, it seems to me, into an altogether other dimension of existence from 
the sensible and merely 'understandable' world. Name it the mystical region, or the 
supernatural region, whichever you choose ... we belong to it in a more intimate 
sense than that in which we belong to the visible world, for we belong in the most 
intimate sense wherever our ideals belong. . . . [The communion with this unseen 
world is a real process with real results. All the roots of religious life and its centre 
we must seek in mystical states of consciousness.]* 
* William James, The Varieties of Religious Experience, New York, Longmans 
Green, 1917.

[PAG 247]
What then is mysticism? 
Returning to the terminology established in the preceding chapters, we 
may say that mystical states of consciousness are connected with cognition 
under conditions of expanded consciousness. 
Until quite recent times scientific psychology refused to recognize the 
reality of mystical experience and considered all mystical states to be 
pathological, unhealthy conditions of ordinary consciousness. A great many
positivist psychologists still hold to this opinion, mixing together in one lump
real mystical states, pseudo-mystical perversions of the ordinary state, purely 
psychopathic states and more or less conscious deceit. 
Naturally, this does not assist a right understanding of the question. 
Therefore, before proceeding further, we must establish the means by which 
we can single out real mystical states. 
Professor James gives certain criteria for distinguishing mystical states: 
inexpressibility in words, intuitiveness, involuntary quality and so on. But he 
points out himself that all these characteristics belong also to ordinary
emotional states. And he does not define exactly what constitutes the 
difference between mystical states and emotional states which are actually 
very close to them in their character. 
If we regard mystical states as cognition by expanded consciousness, we 
can advance quite definite criteria for discerning them and picking them out 
of the general mass of psychological experience. 
1 Mystical states give knowledge WHICH NOTHING ELSE CAN GIVE. 
2 Mystical states give knowledge of the real world with all its attributes. 
3 The mystical states of men belonging to different ages and different 
peoples show astonishing similarity, and at times complete identity. 
4 The results of mystical experience are totally illogical from our ordinary 
point of view. They are super-logical, i.e. TERTIUM ORGANUM, 
WHICH IS PRECISELY THE KEY TO MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE, is fully 
applicable to them. 
The latter is especially important - the illogicality of the results of mystical 
experience made science repudiate them. Now we have established that 
illogically (from our point of view) is the condition necessary for knowing
the truth or the real world. This does not mean that everything illogical is true 
or real, but it certainly means that everything true and real is, from our point 
of view, illogical. 
We have established the fact that with our logic it is impossible to

[PAG 248]
approach truth, and we have also established the possibility of a new instrument of 
thought which helps to penetrate into regions hitherto inaccessible. 
Awareness of the need to have such an instrument of thought undoubtedly existed 
very long ago, for what is the formula Tat tvam asi if not the FUNDAMENTAL AXIOM OF 
HIGHER LOGIC? 
Thou are That means: thou are both thou and not thou and corresponds to the super­
logical formula - A is both A and not A. 
If we examine ancient scriptures from this point of view, we shall understand that 
their authors were looking for a new logic, and were not satisfied with the logic of 
things of the phenomenal world. Then we shall understand the apparent illogicality of 
ancient philosophical systems, which seemed to build for themselves an ideal world in 
place of the existing one. It is precisely in these constructions of an ideal world that 
systems of higher logic are often concealed. 
One of such not understood attempts to construe a system of higher logic, to give an 
exact instrument of thought penetrating beyond the limits of the visible world, is the 
treatise of Plotinus 'On Intelligible Beauty'. 
Describing HEAVEN and the GODS Plotinus says: 
All the gods are venerable and beautiful, and their beauty is immense. What else 
however is it but intellect through which they are such? and because intellect 
energizes in them in so great a degree as to render them visible [by its light?] For it is 
not because their bodies are beautiful. For those gods that have bodies, do not 
through this derive their subsistence as gods; but these also are gods through 
intellect. For they are not at one time wise, and at another destitute of wisdom; but 
they are always wise, in an impassive, stable, and pure intellect. They likewise know 
all things [by providence] not human concerns but their own, which are divine, and 
such as intellect sees. . . . For all things there are heaven, and there the earth is 
heaven, as also are the sea, animals, plants and men. . . . The gods likewise that it 
contains do not think men undeserving of their regard, or anything else that is there 
[because everything there is divine]. And they occupy and pervade without ceasing 
the whole of that [blissful] region. For the life which is there is unattended with 
labour, and truth [as Plato says in the 'Phaedrus'] is their generator, and nutriment, 
their essence and nurse. They likewise see all things, not those with which 
generation, but those with which essence is present. And they perceive themselves in 
others. For all things there are diaphanous; and nothing is dark and resisting, but 
every thing is apparent to everyone internally and throughout. For light everywhere 
meets with light; since every thing contains all things in itself, and again sees all 
things in another. So that all things are everywhere, and all is all. Each thing 
likewise is every thing. And the splendour there is infinite. For every thing there is 
great, since even that which is small is