=== Tertium Organum (P. D. Ouspensky).pdf — CHUNK 3/18 ===
Chars: 45,000 | Offset: 88,673



[PAG 42]
actions and accidental new combinations of causes. The future is considered 
either as completely undetermined or only partially determined, because at 
each moment new forces, new events, new phenomena may arise, which have 
hitherto lain dormant. These new factors, although not causeless in 
themselves, are so utterly incommensurable with their causes - for instance a 
city set ablaze from a single spark - that it is impossible to allow for them or 
correlate them. 
This theory asserts that one and the same action may produce different 
results; one and the same cause may give rise to different effects. In addition, 
it puts forward the hypothesis that quite deliberate volitional actions on the 
part of a man may bring about a complete change in the subsequent events of 
his own and other people's lives. 
Supporters of the predestination theory contend that volitional, deliberate 
actions also depend on certain causes which make them necessary and 
unavoidable at a given moment; they contend that there is and can be nothing
'accidental'; that the things we call accidental are only those happenings of 
which we do not see the causes because of our limitations; and that the 
different effects resulting from causes which appear to us to be the same 
occur because the causes themselves are really different and only appear to be 
the same owing to the fact that we do not know them sufficiently well and do 
not see them sufficiently clearly. 
The dispute between the theory of a predestined future and the theory of a 
free future is an endless dispute. Neither the one side nor the other can put 
forward anything decisive. And this is so because both theories are too literal, 
too rigid, too material, and the one excludes the other. Both of them say: 
'Either this or that.' The result on the one hand is complete cold 
predestination: come what may, nothing can be changed - what will be 
tomorrow has been predestined tens of thousands of years ago; and on the 
other hand, some sort of life on the point of a needle named the present, 
surrounded on all sides by the gulf of non-existence - a journey into a country
that does not yet exist, a life in a world which is born and dies every moment, 
in which nothing ever returns. These opposite views are both equally wrong,
because here, as in many other cases, the truth lies in a unification of these 
two opposite understandings into one whole. 
At every given moment all the future of the world is predestined and 
existing, but it is predestined conditionally, i.e. there must be one or another 
future in accordance with the direction of events of the given moment, if no 
new factor comes in. And a new factor can only

[PAG 43]
come in from the side of consciousness and the will resulting from it. It is 
important to understand and assimilate this. 
In addition, our lack of understanding of the relation between the present 
and the past hinders us from having a right understanding of the relation of 
the present to the future. Differences of opinion arise only concerning the 
future; as regards the past everyone is in agreement that it has passed, that it 
no longer exists - and that it was such as it was. In this past lies the key to the 
understanding of the errors in our view of the future. The fact is that, in 
reality, our relation to the past and the future is much more complex than it 
appears. In the past, in what is behind us, lies not only what was, but also 
what could have been. In the same way, in the future lies not only what will 
be but also all that may be. 
The past and the future are equally undetermined; the past and the future 
equally exist in all their possibilities, and equally exist simultaneously with 
the present. 
By time we mean the distance separating events in the order of their 
sequence and binding them into different wholes. This distance lies in a 
direction not contained in three-dimensional space. If we think of this 
direction as lying in space, it will be a new extension of space. 
This new extension fulfils all the requirements we may demand of the fourth 
dimension on the basis of the preceding arguments. 
It is as incommensurable with the measurements of three-dimensional 
space, as a year is incommensurable with St Petersburg. It is perpendicular to 
all the three directions of three-dimensional space and is not parallel to any of 
them. 
As a deduction from everything that has gone before we may say that time 
(as it is usually taken) contains two ideas: the idea of a certain space 
unknown to us (the fourth dimension), and the idea of movement in this 
space. Our constant mistake lies in the fact that we never see two ideas in 
time, but always see only one. As a rule we see in time the idea of motion, but 
cannot tell from whence, whither, where and in which space. Attempts have 
been made before to link the idea of the fourth dimension with the idea of 
time. But in all the theories which attempted to link the idea of time with the 
fourth dimension there was always the implication of some kind of space in 
time and of some sort of motion in that space. It is evident that those who 
built these theories did not understand that, by retaining the possibility of 
motion, they put forward demands for a new time, for no motion can take 
place without time. As a result time moves in front of us, like our own 
shadow, receding as we approach it. All our ideas of motion have become 
hopelessly confused because, if we imagine a new extension of space and the 
possibility of

[PAG 44]
movement along this new extension, then immediately time confronts us once 
more declaring itself just as unexplained as before. 
We have to admit that by the one term, time, we actually designate two 
ideas - the idea of a 'certain space' and the idea of 'movement in that space'. 
But in actual fact this movement does not exist; it only appears to exist 
because we do not see the space of time. This means that the sensation of 
motion in time (and there is no motion that is not in time) arises in us because 
we look at the world through a narrow slit, as it were, and only see the lines of 
intersection of the plane of time with our three-dimensional space. 
Thus we must acknowledge the profound incorrectness of the usual theory
that the idea of time is evolved by us from our observation of motion and is 
nothing other than the idea of sequence which we observe in motion. 
We have to accept the exact opposite: that the idea of motion is evolved by 
us from the sensation of time or the time-sense, i.e. from the sensation or 
sense of the fourth dimension of space, but out of an incomplete sensation. 
This incomplete sensation of time (of the fourth dimension) - sensation 
through a slit - gives us the sensation of motion, i.e. creates an illusion of 
motion, which is not actually there, and instead of which, in reality, there is 
only extension in a direction we are unable to imagine. 
Yet another aspect of the question is of great importance. The fourth 
dimension is connected with 'time' and with 'motion'. But we shall not be able 
to understand the fourth dimension so long as we do not understand the fifth 
dimension. 
Attempting to look at time as an object, Kant says that it has one 
dimension; this means he represents time to himself as a line extending from 
an infinite future into an infinite past. We are aware of one point in this line ­
always only one point. This point has no dimension because what we call the 
present in the ordinary sense of the word is only the recent past and at times 
also the immediate future. 
This would be correct in relation to our illusory idea of time. But in reality 
eternity is not an infinite extension of time, but a line perpendicular to time; 
for, if eternity exists, each moment is eternal. The line of time proceeds in the 
order of sequence of events according to their causal interdependence - first 
the cause, then the effect: 
before, now, after. The line of eternity proceeds in a direction perpendicular 
to this line. 
It is impossible to understand time without forming an idea of

[PAG 45]
eternity, just as it is impossible to understand space without the idea of time. 
From the point of view of eternity time in no way differs from the other 
lines and extensions of space - length, breadth and height. This means that 
just as space contains things we do not see or, to put it differently, more 
things exist than those we see, so in time 'events' exist before our 
consciousness comes into contact with them, and they still exist after our 
consciousness has withdrawn from them. Consequently, extension in time is 
extension into an unknown space and, therefore, time is the fourth dimension 
of space. 
We must examine the question of time as a spatial concept, relative to our 
two data - the universe and our inner life. 
The idea of time arises from our cognition of the world through sense­
perception. It has already been pointed out that, owing to the properties of our 
sense-perception, we see the world as if through a narrow slit. 
This gives rise to several questions. 
1 Why does apparent motion exist in the world? In other words, why do we 
not always see the same thing through this slit? Why do changes take place
behind the slit, which create the illusion of motion, i.e. how and why does the 
focus of our perception shift from place to place in the world of phenomena? 
In addition we must not forget that through the same slit through which we 
see the world we also look at ourselves and see in ourselves changes similar 
to the changes in everything else. 
2 Why can we not enlarge this slit? 
It is essential to try and answer these questions. 
It should be noted, first of all, that within the limits of our ordinary
observation, our perception always remains in the same conditions and 
cannot get out of these conditions. To put it differently, it seems chained to 
some kind of plane above which it is unable to rise. These conditions or this 
plane we call matter. Our ordinary inner life proceeds on a definite plane (of 
consciousness or matter) and never rises above it. If our perception could rise 
above this plane, it would most certainly see below simultaneously a far 
greater number of events than it usually sees from its position on the plane. If 
a man climbs a mountain or goes up in a balloon he sees simultaneously and 
at once a great many things that it is impossible to see simultaneously and at 
once when on earth - the movement of two trains towards one another which 
must result in a head-on collision; the approach of an enemy detachment to a 
sleeping camp; two towns separated by a

[PAG 46]
mountain ridge and so on. So in this case also, perception rising above the  
plane of consciousness on which it usually lives should see simultaneously 
phenomena which for ordinary perception are separated by periods of time. 
These would be phenomena which ordinary consciousness never sees 
together as cause and effect, for instance, work and pay; crime and 
punishment; the movement of trains towards each other and the collision; the  
approach of the enemy and the battle; 
sunrise and sunset; morning and evening; day and night; spring, autumn,  
summer and winter; the birth and death of a man.  
With this ascent the angle of vision will widen, the moment will expand.  
If we imagine perception taking place on a level above our consciousness, 
and possessing a wider angle of vision, this perception will be able to grasp 
as something simultaneous, i.e. as one moment, all that for us takes place in a  
certain period of time, a minute, an hour, a day, a month. Within the limits of 
its moment such a perception will be unable to separate before, now and after;  
for it, all this will be now. Now will expand. 
But for this to take place it is necessary for us to be able to free ourselves  
from matter, because matter is nothing other than the conditions of time and 
space in which we live. The question arises:  
can consciousness get beyond the conditions of a given material existence  
without itself undergoing a fundamental change, or without disappearing 
altogether in the ordinary sense, as the positivists would say? 
This is a very debatable question. Later, I shall give examples and 
arguments in favour of this idea that our consciousness can get out of the  
conditions of a given materiality. At present I want to establish what should 
take place when it does get out.  
The result should be precisely the expansion of the moment: all that we 
perceive in time would become one moment in which the past, the present  
and the future would be visible all at once. This shows the relativity of 
motion, inasmuch as for us it depends on the limitations of the moment, and 
this moment includes only a small pan of the impressions of life we take in. 
So we have every right to say that instead of 'time' being deduced from 
'motion' it is motion that is sensed owing to time-sense. We have this sense, 
therefore we sense motion. Time-sense is the sense of successive moments. If 
we had no time-sense we would not sense motion. But the time-sense itself is 
the boundary or the surface of our 'space-sense'. Where 'space-sense' ends,  
'time-sense' begins. It has been made clear that in its properties 'time' is  
identical with 'space',

[PAG 47]
i.e. it possesses all the attributes of space extension. Yet we do not feel it as space  
extension, but feel it as time, i.e. as something specific, inexpressible in any other  
words, indissolubly bound up with motion. This inability to feel time spatially is due to 
the fact that our time-sense is a nebulous sense of space; with our time-sense we feel 
dimly those new characteristics of space which transcend the sphere of three  
dimensions. 
What is time-sense and why does the illusion of motion arise? The only way to answer 
this question in a more or less satisfactory manner is by studying the forms and levels  
of our inner life. 
Moreover, our inner life is a complex phenomenon within which there is also 
constant movement. About the nature of this movement I shall speak later, but it is this 
movement in us that creates the illusion of movement around us, i.e. movement in the 
material world. 
The well-known mathematician, Riemann, realized that, in regard to this question of 
higher dimensions, time in some way becomes translated into space, and he regarded 
the material atom as the entrance of the fourth dimension into three-dimensional space. 
In one of his books Hinton has very interesting things to say about the 'law of 
surfaces': 
This relationship of a surface to a solid or of a solid ... to a higher solid, is one which 
we often meet in nature. A surface is nothing more nor less than the relation between 
two things. Two bodies touch each other. The surface is the relationship of one to the 
other. 
If our space stands in the same relationship to higher space as does a surface to our 
space, then our space may well be really a surface, i.e. the place of contact of two 
spaces of a higher order: 
It is a fact worthy of notice, that in the surface of a fluid different laws obtain from 
those which hold throughout the mass. There are a whole series of facts which are 
grouped together under the name of surface tensions, which are of great importance in 
physics, and by which the behaviour of the surfaces of liquids is governed. 
And it may well be that the laws of our universe are the surface tensions of a higher 
universe. 
According to Hinton, if we consider the surface as a medium lying between two 
bodies it would certainly have no weight, but would be a powerful means of 
transmitting vibrations from one body to another. Moreover it would be unlike any 
other substance, inasmuch as one could never get rid of it. However perfect a vacuum 
be made between

[PAG 48]
the two bodies, there would be in this vacuum just as much of this unknown 
medium (i.e. surface) as there was before. Matter would go freely through 
this medium. Vibrations of this medium would tear asunder portions of 
matter. This would tend to show that this medium is unlike any ordinary 
matter. It possesses properties difficult to reconcile in one and the same 
substance. Is there anything in our experience which corresponds to this 
medium? Do we suppose the existence of any medium through which matter 
freely moves, which yet by its vibrations destroys the combinations of matter 
-some medium which is present in every vacuum, which penetrates all 
bodies, and yet can never be laid hold of? The substance which possesses all 
these qualities is known to us and is called the ether. The properties of the 
ether are a perpetual object of investigation in science. But in view of all the 
considerations mentioned earlier, it would be interesting to have a look at the 
world, supposing that we are not in, but on the ether, and the ether is merely
the surface of contact of two higher-dimensional bodies.* 
Here Hinton expresses an extremely interesting thought; he links the idea 
of ether - which in the 'material' or even the 'energy' views of modern physics 
remains completely unproductive and leads to a dead end - with the idea of 
'time'. For him ether is not a substance but only a 'surface', the 'boundary' of 
something. But of what? Again not of a substance, but only the limit, the 
surface, the boundary of one form of perception and the beginning of another. 
. . . 
Here, in a sentence, the walls and fences of the materialistic dead end are 
broken down, and new and unexplored vistas revealed to our thought. 
' C. H. Hinton, A New Era of Thought, London, George Allen & Unwin, 1910, pp. 
52, 56, 57.

[PAG 49]
CHAPTER 5  
Four-dimensional space. 'Time-body' - Linga Sharira. Form of the human body from 
birth to death. Incommensurability of a three-dimensional and a four-dimensional 
body. Newton's fluents. Unreality of constant magnitudes in our world. Right and left 
hand in three-dimensional and a four-dimensional space. Differences between three­
dimensional and four-dimensional space. Not two different spaces, but two different 
modes of perception of one and the same world. 
Four-dimensional space, if we attempt to represent it to ourselves, will be the 
infinite repetition of our space - of our infinite three-dimensional sphere - just 
as a line is the infinite repetition of a point. 
A great deal of what has been said earlier will become much clearer for us 
if we take as our standpoint the view that the 'fourth dimension' should be 
looked for in time. 
It will then become clear what is meant by saying that a four-dimensional 
body may be regarded as the trace of the movement in space of a three­
dimensional body in a direction not contained in it. The direction, not 
contained in three-dimensional space, in which every three-dimensional body 
moves, is the direction of time. By existing, every three-dimensional body 
moves in time, as it were, and leaves the trace of its motion in the form of a 
time-body, or a four-dimensional body. Because of the properties of our 
perceiving apparatus, we never see or sense this body; we only see its section, 
and this we call a three-dimensional body. Therefore, we are greatly mistaken 
in thinking that a three-dimensional body is something real. It is merely the 
projection of a four-dimensional body - its drawing, its image on our plane. 
A four-dimensional body is an infinite number of three-dimensional bodies. 
In other words, a four-dimensional body is an infinite number of moments of 
existence of a three-dimensional body - of its states and positions. The three­
dimensional body which we see is only a figure on a cinema film, so to 
speak, one of a series of snapshots, 
Four-dimensional space - time - is actually the distance between the forms, 
states and positions of one and the same body (and of different bodies, i.e. 
bodies which appear different to us). It separates those forms, states and 
positions from one another, and it also binds

[PAG 50]
each one into some whole incomprehensible for us. This incomprehensible whole may 
be formed in time out of one physical body, or it may be formed out of different bodies. 
It is easier for us to imagine such a time-'whole' if it refers to one physical body. 
If we think of the physical body of a man, we shall find that, besides 'matter', there is 
something which, though altering, unquestionably remains the same from birth to 
death. 
This something is the Linga Sharira of Indian philosophy, i.e. the form in which our 
physical body is moulded (The Secret Doctrine, H. P. Blavatsky). Eastern philosophy 
regards the physical body as something inconstant, something which is in a perpetual 
state of interchange with its surroundings. Particles come and go. The next second the 
body is no longer absolutely the same as it was a second earlier; today it is already 
quite different from what it was yesterday. After seven years it is an entirely different 
body. But, in spite of this, something always remains from birth to death; its aspect 
may change, but it remains the same. This is Linga Sharira. 
Linga Sharira is the form, the image; it changes, but it remains the same. Any image 
of a man that we may portray to ourselves is not Linga Sharira. But if we try to form a 
mental picture of a man -stretched out in time, as it were - from birth to death, with all 
the details and features of childhood, maturity and old age, this will be Linga Sharira. 
All things have form. We say that each separate thing consists of matter and form. 
As was already said by 'matter' we mean the causes of a long series of mixed 
sensations; but matter without form is not perceived by us; we cannot even think of 
matter without form. But we can visualize and think of form without matter. 
A thing, i.e. a combination of form and matter, is never constant, it always changes 
in the course of time. This idea enabled Newton to evolve his theory affluents and 
fluxions. 
Newton came to the conclusion that there are no constant magnitudes in nature. 
Only variable, flowing magnitudes exist -fluents. Newton named the rates of change of 
individual fluents, fluxions. 
From the point of view of this theory all the things we know -people, plants, 
animals, planets - are fluents, and only differ from each other by the magnitude of their 
fluxions. But, while constantly changing in time, sometimes very radically and 
quickly, as for instance, a living body, a thing still remains the same. A man's body in 
youth, a man's body in old age - it is still the same body, although we know that in the 
old body not an atom of the young body is left.

[PAG 51]
Matter changes, but something remains the same notwithstanding all the 
changes. This something is Linga Sharira. Newton's theory is true for a three­
dimensional world existing in time. In this world nothing is constant. 
Everything is variable, because every moment a thing is no longer what it 
was before. We never see the body of Linga Sharira, we always see only its 
parts, and they appear to us variable. But if we look more closely, we shall 
see that this is an illusion. It is three-dimensional things that are unreal and 
variable. And they cannot be real, because, in actual fact, they do not exist, 
just as imaginary sections of a solid do not exist. Only four-dimensional 
bodies are real. 
In one of his lectures collected in the book, A Pluralistic Universe, 
Professor James draws attention to an observation by Professor Bergson that 
science always studies only the t of the universe, i.e. not the universe as a 
whole, but only the moment, the 'time-section' of the universe. 
The properties of four-dimensional space will become clearer for us if we 
make a detailed comparison of three-dimensional space with a surface and 
find out the differences that exist between them. 
In his book, A New Era of Thought, Hinton examines these differences 
carefully. He imagines two equal right-angle triangles cut out of paper and 
placed on a plane surface with the right angles pointing in different 
directions. These triangles are exactly equal but, for some reason, they are 
quite different. One has its right angle pointing to the right, the other points to 
the left. If anyone wishes to make these triangles absolutely identical, it can 
only be done with the help of three-dimensional space. This means that one 
of the triangles must be picked up, turned over and replaced on the plane. 
Then they will be two equal and absolutely identical triangles. But to do this, 
it is necessary to lift one triangle from the plane into three-dimensional space
and turn it over in that space. If this triangle is left on the plane, it can never 
be made identical with the other if, at the same time, the relation between the 
angles of the two triangles is to be kept. If the triangle is merely turned round 
on the plane, this relation will not be maintained. In our world there are 
figures completely analogous to these two triangles. 
We know certain shapes which are equal the one to the other, which are exactly 
similar, and yet which we cannot make fit into the same portion of space, either 
practically or by imagination.

[PAG 52]
If we look at our hands we see quite clearly that our two hands are a very 
complicated case of non-symmetrical likeness. They are at the same time alike and 
quite different. One is right, the other is left. We can imagine only one way in which 
the two hands may be brought into complete likeness. 
If we take the right-hand glove and the left-hand glove, they will not fit any more than 
the right hand will coincide with the left hand. But if we turn one glove inside out, 
then it will fit. Now, to suppose the same thing done with the solid hand as is done 
with the glove when it is turned inside out, we must suppose it, so to speak pulled 
through itself. ... If such an operation were possible, the right hand would be turned 
into an exact model of the left hand.* 
But such an operation would be possible only in higher-dimensional space, just as 
the turning over of the triangle is possible only in a space higher than the plane. It is 
possible that, even granting the existence of four-dimensional space, a hand cannot be 
turned inside out and pulled through itself for reasons not dependent on geometrical 
conditions. But the example still holds good. Theoretically, things in the nature of the 
turning of a hand inside out should be possible in four-dimensional space, for in that 
space different, even very far removed points of our space and time should come into 
contact or be able to come into contact. All the points of a sheet of paper spread out on 
a table are separated from one another. But, if we lift the sheet off the table, we can 
fold it so as to bring any points we like into contact. If on one corner we write 'St 
Petersburg' and on another 'Madras', this will not prevent us from folding these corners 
together. Or, if on one corner the year 1812 is written, and on another the year 1912, 
these corners can also be made to touch. If the year on one corner is written in red ink 
and the ink is not yet dry, the figures may get imprinted on another corner. Then, if the 
sheet is once more opened out and placed on the table, to a man who does not know 
that it can be lifted off the table and folded in many different ways, it will appear quite 
incomprehensible how a figure on one corner could become imprinted on another 
corner. The possibility of any contact between distant points of the sheet will be 
incomprehensible for him and will remain incomprehensible for him so long as he 
thinks of the sheet in two-dimensional space only. As soon as he imagines the sheet in 
three-dimensional space, this possibility will become real and obvious for him. 
* C. H. Hinton, A New Era of Thought, London, George Allen & Unwin, 1910, p. 
44.

[PAG 53]
Examining the relation of the fourth dimension to the three dimensions 
known to us, we must admit that our geometry is obviously inadequate for the 
investigation of higher space. 
It was pointed out earlier that a four-dimensional body is incommensurable 
with a three-dimensional one, just as a year is incommensurable with St 
Petersburg.
It is quite clear why this is so. A four-dimensional body consists of an 
infinitely great number of three-dimensional bodies; therefore, they can have 
no common measure. In comparison with a four-dimensional body, a three­
dimensional body is analogous to a point as compared with a line. 
And, as a point is incommensurable with a line, as a line is 
incommensurable with a surface, as a surface is incommensurable with a solid 
- so a three-dimensional body is incommensurable with a four-dimensional 
one. 
It is also clear why the geometry of three dimensions is not sufficient to 
define the position of the domain of the fourth dimension in relation to three­
dimensional space. 
Just as in one-dimensional geometry, i.e. on a line, it is impossible to define 
the position of the surface of which the given line is a side; 
just as on the surface - two-dimensional geometry - it is impossible to define 
the position of the solid of which the given surface is a side, so in three­
dimensional geometry, in three-dimensional space, it is impossible to define 
four-dimensional space. Putting it briefly, as planimetry is inadequate for the 
study of questions of stereometry, so stereometry is inadequate for the study
of four-dimensional space. 
As a deduction from everything that has been said, it may be repeated that 
each point of our space is a cross-section of a line of a higher space, or as 
Riemann put it: the material atom is the entry of the fourth dimension into 
three-dimensional space. 
In order to come nearer to this problem of higher dimensions and higher 
space it is first of all necessary to understand the essence of the domain of 
higher dimensions and its properties as compared with the domain of three 
dimensions. Only then will it be possible to investigate this domain more 
precisely and find out the laws which operate in it. 
What is it that we have to understand? 
It seems to me that, before anything else, it is necessary to understand that 
here it is not a question of two spatially different domains — or of two 
domains, one of which (again spatially, 'geometrically')

[PAG 54]
constitutes a part of the other - but of two modes of perception of the same 
one world of one space.
Further, it is necessary to understand that all the objects known to us exist 
not only in the categories in which we perceive them, but in an infinite 
number of others in which we do not know, or are unable to know, how to 
sense them. So first of all we must learn to think of things in other categories, 
then represent them to ourselves as far as we can in these other categories. 
Then and then only we may develop the capacity for perceiving things in 
higher space, and of sensing 'higher space' itself. 
Or, perhaps, the first thing required is a direct perception of everything in 
the surrounding world that is not included within the framework of three 
dimensions, that exists outside the category of time and space - everything, 
therefore, that we are accustomed to regard as non-existent. It variability is a 
sign of the three-dimensional world, we must seek for that which is constant, 
and in this way we may come closer to an understanding of the four­
dimensional world. Moreover, we are accustomed to regard as really existing
only that which can be measured in length, breadth and height. But, as has 
been pointed out already, it is necessary to widen the boundaries of the really
existing. Mensurability is too crude a criterion of existence, because 
mensurability itself is too conditioned a concept. So we may say that any 
approach to an exact investigation of the domain of higher dimensions 
probably requires the conviction, derived from direct sensation, that many
things that cannot be measured have a real existence, more real indeed than 
many things that can be measured.

[PAG 55]
CHAPTER 6  
Methods of investigating the problem of higher dimensions. Analogy between 
imaginary worlds of different dimensions. One-dimensional world on a line. 'Space' 
and 'time' of a one-dimensional being. Two-dimensional world on a plane. 'Space' 
and 'time', 'ether', 'matter' and 'motion' of a two-dimensional being. Reality and 
illusion on a plane. Impossibility of seeing an 'angle'. An 'angle' as motion. 
Incomprehensibility, for a two-dimensional being, of the functions of the objects of 
our world. Phenomena and noumena of a two-dimensional being. How could a plane 
being understand the third dimension? 
In order to determine what the domain of higher dimensions could be and  
what it could not be, a series of analogies and comparisons are generally  
used.  
The usual way is to imagine 'worlds' of one and two dimensions and, from 
the relationship between the lower worlds and the higher worlds to deduce 
the possible relation of our world to the four-dimensional world in the same 
way as from the relations of points to line, of lines to surfaces, of surfaces to 
solids, we deduce the relationship of our solids to four-dimensional bodies.  
Let us examine all that this method of analogies has to offer.  
Let us imagine a one-dimensional world. 
It will be a line. On this line let us imagine living beings. They will only be 
able to move backwards and forwards along this line which represents their  
universe, and they themselves will have the aspect of points or sections of the 
line. Nothing outside this line will exist for them, neither will they be  
conscious of the line itself on which they live and move. Only two points will 
exist for them - ahead and behind; or maybe only one point, ahead. Observing 
changes in the state of these points the one-dimensional being will call these  
changes phenomena. If we suppose that the line on which the one­ 
dimensional being lives, passes through various objects of our world, then, in 
all these objects the one-dimensional being will see only one point. If his line  
is intersected by different bodies, the one-dimensional being will sense them  
only as the appearance, the more or less prolonged existence and the 
disappearance of a point. This appearance, existence and disappearance of a 
point will be a

[PAG 56]
phenomenon. For the one-dimensional being phenomena will be constant or variable, of 
long or short duration, periodical or not periodical, according to the character and 
qualities and the rate and nature of the motion of objects passing through the line. But 
the one-dimensional being will be totally unable to explain the constancy or variability, 
the long or short duration, the periodicity or non-periodicity of the phenomena of his 
world, and will simply regard these as attributes inherent in the phenomena. Bodies 
intersecting the line may be very different, but for the one-dimensional being all 
phenomena will be absolutely identical - only the appearance and disappearance of a 
point - and all phenomena will differ from one another only in duration and greater or 
lesser periodicity. 
This curious monotony and homogeneity of phenomena, which, from our point of 
view, are so diverse and heterogeneous, will be the characteristic peculiarity of the one­
dimensional world. 
Then, if we suppose that the one-dimensional being possesses memory, we shall see 
that, calling all the points he has seen phenomena, he will refer them all to time. The 
point which was is a phenomenon no longer existing, and the point which may appear 
tomorrow is a phenomenon not yet existing. The whole of our space, with the exception 
of one line, will be called time, i.e. something whence phenomena come and whither 
they go. And the one-dimensional being will say that he got the idea of time from the 
observation of motion, i.e. from the appearance and disappearance of poults. Points will 
be regarded as time-phenomena, i.e. as phenomena coming into being at that moment 
when they become visible, and disappearing - ceasing to exist - at that moment when 
they become invisible. It is impossible for a one-dimensional being to imagine that a 
phenomenon can exist somewhere and yet be invisible; 
or he will imagine it as existing somewhere on his line, far ahead of him. 
We can imagine this one-dimensional being still more realistically. Let us take an 
atom floating in space, or simply a speck of dust driven by the wind, and let us suppose 
that this atom or speck of dust possesses consciousness, i.e. that it differentiates 
between itself and the surrounding world and is conscious of that which lies on the line 
of its motion, that with which it comes into direct contact. This will be a one­
dimensional being in the full sense of the word. He may move and fly in all directions, 
but it will always seem to him that he moves on one line; outside this line only a vast 
Nothing will exist for him - the whole universe will appear to him as one line. He will 
neither feel nor represent to himself any of the turnings of his line,

[PAG 57]
that is, none of the angles, because to feel an angle, one must be aware of what lies to 
the right and the left, or above and below. In all other respects this being will be 
absolutely identical with the imaginary being living on the imaginary line I have just 
described. Everything he comes into contact with, i.e. everything he is conscious of, 
will seem to him to be emerging from time, i.e. out of nothing, and vanishing into time, 
i.e. into nothing. This nothing will be all our world. Apart from one line, the whole of 
our world will be called time and will be regarded as having no real existence. 
Now let us consider the two-dimensional world and a being living on a plane. For this 
being the universe will be one vast plane. On this plane let us imagine beings in the 
shape of points, lines and flat geometrical figures. The objects and 'bodies' of this world 
will also have the shape of flat geometrical figures. 
How will a being living on this plane universe perceive his world? We can say, first of 
all, that he will not sense the plane on which he lives. He will sense the objects, i.e. the 
figures lying on this plane; he will sense the lines which bound them, and for that very 
reason he will not sense his own plane because if he did, he would be unable to 
distinguish these lines. The lines will differ from the plane by the fact that they produce 
sensations, consequently they exist. The plane does not produce sensations; 
consequently it does not exist. Moving along the plane and not experiencing any 
sensations, the two-dimensional being will say that at the moment there is nothing 
there. Approaching some figure and getting the sensation of its lines, he will say that 
something has appeared. But gradually, through reasoning, the two-dimensional being 
will come to the conclusion that the figures he meets with exist on something or in 
something. So he may call this plane - 'ether' (of course, he will not know that it is 
actually a plane). Then he will say that 'ether' fills all space, but differs in its properties 
from 'matter'. So he will call lines - 'matter'. As a result, the two-dimensional being will 
regard everything that happens as happening in his 'ether', that is, in his space. He will 
not be able to imagine anything as being outside this ether, i.e. outside his plane. If 
something happening outside his plane reaches his consciousness, he will either deny it, 
taking it as subjective, i.e. as a creation of his own imagination, or he will think of it as 
he thinks of all other phenomena, as happening on that very plane, in ether. 
Sensing the lines only, the plane being will sense them quite differently from us. 
First of all, he will not sense an angle. It is very easy to verify this in practice. If we 
hold on a level with our eyes two

[PAG 58]
matches placed on a horizontal surface at an angle to one another, we will see 
one line. To see the angle we must look from above. The two-dimensional 
being cannot look from above, and therefore cannot see an angle. But by 
measuring the distance between the lines of the different 'solids' of his world, 
the two-dimensional being will be constantly confronted with angles and will 
regard the angle as a strange property of the line which at times appears and 
at others does not appear. In other words, he will refer the angle to time, will 
regard it as a transitory temporal phenomenon - a change in the state of the 
'solid' - or as motion. It is difficult for us to understand this, difficult to 
imagine how an angle can be taken as motion. But it must necessarily be so 
and cannot be otherwise. If we try to visualize how a plane being will study a 
square, we shall see that for a plane being the square must necessarily be a 
moving body. Let us imagine a plane being faced with one of the angles of the 
square. He does not see the angle - in front of him there is a line, but a line 
possessing very strange properties. As he comes nearer to this line, the two­
dimensional being will see a strange thing happening to the line. One point
will remain in its place, but the other points, on both sides, will recede 
backwards. I repeat: the two-dimensional being has no idea of an angle. In its 
outward appearance the line will remain the same as it was; and yet, 
something will undoubtedly be happening to it. The plane being will say that 
the line moves, but so rapidly that it appears to be motionless. If the plane 
being draws away from the angle and moves along a side of the square, this 
line will become motionless. Reaching an angle, he will again notice motion. 
If he makes the circuit of the square several times, he will establish the fact 
that there are regular periodical movements of this line. It is probable that for 
the mind of the plane being, the square will be his conception of a body 
possessing the property of periodical movements, unnoticeable to the eye but 
producing definite physical effects (molecular motion), or the idea of 
periodical moments of rest and motion in one complex line; 
and still more probably the square will appear to him as a rotating body. 
Very likely, the plane being will regard the angle as his own subjective 
representation and will doubt whether any objective reality corresponds to 
this subjective representation. But all the same, he will think that so long as 
an action capable of being measured exists, it must have a cause, and this 
cause must lie in the changing states of the line, i.e. in motion. 
The plane being may call the lines he sees - matter, and the angles ­
motion. Thus, the plane being will call an irregular line with an

[PAG 59]
angle - moving matter. And indeed for him, because of its properties, such a 
line will be completely analogous to matter in motion. 
If a cube is placed on the plane on which the plane being lives, the whole 
cube will not exist for the two-dimensional being, but only the square surface 
of it which is in contact with the plane, that is to say, the cube will exist as a 
line with periodical movements. In the same way, all other bodies lying 
outside his plane, touching his plane or passing through it, will not exist for 
the two-dimensional being. He will be able to sense only their surfaces of 
contact or their sections. But if these surfaces or sections move or change, 
quite naturally, the two-dimensional being will think that the cause of change 
or motion lies in themselves, i.e. is also there, on his plane. 
It has already been said that the two-dimensional being will regard only 
straight lines as motionless matter, irregular lines or curves will appear to him 
to be moving. As regards the really moving lines, i.e. those lines which bind 
the sections or the surfaces of contact of the bodies moving through the plane 
or along the plane, these will contain something incomprehensible for a two­
dimensional being, something impossible to measure. They will seem to have 
in them something self-existing, self-dependent, animated. There are two 
reasons for this: the two-dimensional being can measure motionless angles 
and curves, whose properties he calls motion, for the very reason that they are 
motionless; but he cannot measure moving figures because the changes in 
them are outside his control. These changes will depend on the properties of 
the whole body and its motion, whereas the two-dimensional being knows 
only its section, only one side of the whole body. Having no idea of the 
existence of that body and regarding its motion as inherent in the sides and 
sections, he will probably regard them as living beings. He will credit them 
with the possession of something which is absent in ordinary bodi