=== The energy grid - Harmonic 695. The pulse of the universe (Bruce L. Cathie).pdf — CHUNK 4/12 ===
Chars: 44,856 | Offset: 132,646



[PAG 76]
58 
Another such position was, in our opinion, near the corner of 
Rutland Street, in the central part of the city. If this hypothesis is 
correct, one is naturally led to the conclusion that scientists were 
well aware in advance that certain locations would be subjected to 
extensive damage as a result of the placement of aerial devices. 
We do not dispute that research of the kind being undertaken in 
secrecy involving both UFOs and aerials may be essential for the 
advancement of mankind.    But it is the secrecy that we feel is 
wrong.   Moreover, the dangers inherent where aerial locations fall 
upon crowded city areas must be obvious.   If the rules of geometry 
(and the concepts involved are those of geometries) compel whoever 
is responsible to construct apparatus of a dangerous nature in densely 
populated areas, then surely the citizens of those areas have a right 
to be told — and to be warned of the possible consequences of the 
experiments to be carried out. If the instigators of the research 
happen also to be representatives of a foreign country, which we 
believe to be the case, this is all the more reason for the nature of 
the experimental work to be made public. 
One scientist has told me quite plainly that the aerial network is 
not under the control of the New Zealand Government. I find the 
implications of that statement rather disquieting. Is it possible that 
New Zealand, one of the last peaceful sanctuaries on this planet, is 
being manipulated by a power group operating outside the normal 
confines of demoratic control? I believe there is a distinct possibility 
that this is the situation and that no government, large or small, is 
able to control its activities. 
The knowledge possessed already by the group may be so ad- 
vanced that those who have the secrets may be in a position to 
dictate action on their own terms, particularly if political leverage 
is 
applied 
at 
the 
same 
time, 
through 
normal 
governmental 
channels. 
It was suggested to me by my informant that this was indeed the 
case, and that New Zealand would be cut off from certain overseas 
aid if our government refused to allow the activities of foreign sci- 
entists to continue within our territory. 
We believe that this is too high a price. If our dealings with 
overseas interests are not openly and honestly carried out, then we 
would be much better off not to have this work going on in our 
midst. Who among us, anywhere in the world, has the right to 
decide who should and who should not have access to advanced 
technical knowledge — or to any knowledge, for that matter?

[PAG 77]
59 
Technological superiority is dangerous only when held by a small 
 group. History shows that groups of this very nature have, in times 
past, invariably used their superior knowledge for purposes other 
than for the good of all humanity, eventually destroying themselves 
and 
large 
numbers 
of 
their 
fellow 
men 
along 
with 
them. 
The atomic bomb offers a prime example of the folly of secrecy in 
the field of advanced technology.   I know for certain that my theo- 
ries  regarding the bomb have been proved correct.  The bomb is, in 
short, a geometric device which can only be detonated in accordance 
with the unbreakable laws of geometry.  The device is detonated by 
the manipulation of the relative motions of the atomic particles 
enclosed within its casing; and this can only be effected by placing 
the bomb on, under or over a specific geometric point related to the 
earth's surface, at a specific time. The relative motions of the 
earth and sun, at this instant of time, cause the disruption of the 
unstable particles of uranium, plutonium, cobalt or whatever un- 
stable matter is used to trigger the explosion. Every test of nuclear 
devices since World War II has been designed to discover all the 
geometric combinations possible for the detonation of the atom. 
because of the secrecy imposed on this advanced body of knowl- 
edge, every major power has been frantically carrying out experi- 
mental tests in an endeavour to keep up with, or ahead of, rival 
powers — in the fear that one or the other will eventually get the 
upper hand.  The computers of each nation concerned are fed with 
this information so that calculations can be made ahead as to where 
and when a nuclear device might be triggered.   In this way the 
spiral of insecurity and distrust has increased its momentum until, 
at this present time, the world has become a mad-house with our- 
selves its inmates.   Unless something is done, a system set up for 
the  pooling of all knowledge, we shall end up as have so many other 
civilizations, intent on annihilation of the race. 
If every intelligent individual had had free access to these secrets 
immediately after the war, the sheer weight of public opinion alone 
might have been enough to prevent the insane game now being 
played the world over in the name of national security.   Certainly, 
at least, the brakes would have been applied to slow down our 
headlong rush, to eternity. 
The geometric nature of the bomb makes a nuclear war com- 
pletely illogical — and perhaps this explains the present concentra- 
tion of research in the United States, England, Switzerland and 
elsewhere into bacterial and chemical warfare techniques.

[PAG 78]
Why is a nuclear war illogical? 
Let's take an example: if Russia, let us say, were to launch a 
missile in an attempt to demolish New York, the Americans would 
have known months in advance that at such-and-such a time the 
city would have been a potential nuclear target. Their computers 
would have told them so. Naturally, all defences would have been 
alerted for that one target point until the danger period had passed. 
If a missile managed to get through the defence system and New 
York was incinerated, America would want immediate retaliation. 
But again because of the solar geometries involved, this would not 
be possible at any unspecified time for any specific Soviet target. It 
could take hours; days or weeks for a major target in Russia to 
match the harmonic geometries of the sun position in order for a 
missile to be successfully launched towards that point with any cer- 
tainty of its detonation. And so it would drag on, month after month. 
For this very reason it became necessary to arm submarines with 
nuclear weapons and launching devices so that they could roam the 
oceans in secrecy and be able to position themselves in such a way 
that they could launch nuclear missiles at enemy targets as the 
right times came up. 
Meanwhile, those at the top who had started this insane war, 
and those in control on both sides, would know clearly, and well in 
advance, where the danger spots were going to be. They would 
make sure that they themselves were many hundreds of miles away 
until the danger periods had passed. The general populace, you can 
be sure, would be blissfully unaware of impending explosions. 
An even more dangerous and complex game has now been initi- 
ated by the same group. Knowledge obtained from the bomb has 
opened a door to secrets of anti-gravity; if one group or another 
obtains supremacy in this field, they could, if they desired, rule 
the world. 
For UFOs are real. They are anti-gravity machines. Someone 
has advanced knowledge about them. Now we would like to have 
access to the truth, all of it, and a democratic voice in the control 
of our own destiny. 
My informant declared that his group was not concerned with 
moral issues. Its representatives are here to carry out certain work 
and it is only this task that interests them. It is neither right nor 
good, he declared, for the public to have knowledge such as this. 
My answer was that I was part of the public, a free man in what 
I believed to be a free country; and that, relying on my own 
60

[PAG 79]
61 
resources, I had been able to discover a considerable amount of in- 
formation concerning the activities of the people in question. 
I often wonder how much worry, how many years of hard work, 
I could have saved myself if only it could have been possible for me 
to study all the relevant data in freely available technical publica- 
tions. 
Isn't it the right of all free citizens to have access to the technol- 
ogy of the future? I firmly believe that we do all have that right — 
the alternative is to end up like Pavlov's dogs, when we may all be 
forced to perform at the will of a new kind of master. 
Time and again I have asked to be given just one good moral 
reason why the data known on UFOs should not be published. So 
far no reason has been forthcoming, and I believe that none exists. 
Investigations of a private nature such as I have undertaken will be 
carried on. I believe firmly that others, with more intelligence and 
greater technical ability than I have, will continue this work. 
To look more closely at the aerial network in and around the city 
of Auckland: the picture is a complicated one, but a prolonged study 
of the system reveals many connections with the geometric harmon- 
ics associated with anti-gravity and UFO phenomena.    It shows 
without doubt that some technicians at least have direct communi- 
cation with UFOs that have been active on the positions indicated 
on the Auckland section of the UFO grid. Who is actually in control 
of the UFOs?   This we cannot as yet determine — but there are 
several 
possible 
answers, 
including 
the 
following: 
 1. The UFOs are controlled by extraterrestrials who are greatly 
advanced in science.   These aliens are instructing our scien- 
tists in new technological fields. 
2. 
Earth 
scientists 
have 
uncovered 
the 
secrets 
of 
anti-gravity 
and have managed to construct a small number of UFO-type 
vehicles.   These anti-gravity machines are now being used to 
further 
research 
and 
to 
improve 
their 
scientific 
techniques. 
3. The UFOs are under the control of extraterrestrials, and their 
activity is aimed at hindering earth scientists in their research. 
4. An alien group of people from space have lived among us 
secretly throughout history and now control the world.   They 
are in charge of all advanced scientific experimentation. (This, 
we 
feel, 
is 
the 
least 
likely 
answer.) 
5. Other possibilities which we are as yet unaware of. 
We do not know, any more than you do, which answer is the true 
one. But it may not be too long before we find out.

[PAG 80]
MAP 4 
 
62

[PAG 81]
63 
I was told by a foreigner holding a high position with one of the 
government ministries that I would be stopped from publishing this 
book by those in charge of "the experiment." "The group," I was 
told, "is all-powerful, and you can't possibly beat them." My answer 
was that I was fully aware of the power weilded by the "group," as 
well as of my own relative insignificance. 
History 
shows 
that 
in 
other 
ages 
"insignificant" 
men 
have 
succeeded in upsetting the plans of power groups, and with perse- 
verance and luck I may be able to do the same — because I am con- 
vinced that the "group," closely guarding secrets that should be 
freely available to all, is morally evil. 
A study of the Auckland map will show that it is an exact repro- 
duction of the grid map published in my previous book. The grid 
lattice covers areas of one minute of arc square. 
Positions 1 through 6 are those of UFO activity previously plot- 
ted. These are, in more detail: 
1. Rosebank Road factory demolished by an unexplained explo- 
sion. A UFO was reported over the scene before the explosion 
occurred. 
2.  Unexplained explosion at the corner of Rutland Street, Auck- 
land city. 
3.  UFO observed hovering near the Museum, Auckland Domain: 
4. UFO observed hovering behind a house in Inverary Road, 
Epsom, in suburban Auckland. 
5. Lake Pupuke, North Shore, over which point a UFO has been 
observed. 
6.  Object was seen entering the water from the air at this point. 
7. I was informed by the head of a government department in 
Auckland that a UFO had been seen hovering over this point. 
8. This is the position of a base staffed by personnel from one of 
the most powerful nations on earth. This fact was first drawn 
to my attention during a visit to Victoria University, Welling- 
ton, in 1969. I had presented a lecture to students. After the 
lecture, which covered aspects of the UFO grid system, I was 
showing a copy of the Auckland grid map to the American air 
attache, who had asked to be present incognito, and the editor 
of Salient, the university's student newspaper. 
The student asked me what I knew about the American base on 
the North Shore, at Kauri Point. 
Surprised, I asked: "What base?"   He replied: "You must know 
what base I mean; you have plotted it on your map."

[PAG 82]
I told him, quite truthfully, that I had no knowledge of any such 
base. The point on the grid map to which he was referring was 
where I had plotted co-ordinates crossing at Kauri Point; he insisted 
that I must have known of the base in order to have plotted it so 
accurately. I explained that I was completely unaware of the sig- 
nificance of the position, and had only been aware that certain lines 
connecting other stations crossed at this point. I had left it to a 
future time to study the position further. 
Reflecting on this conversation some days later, it occured to me 
that I had probably been "set up" in some way by the invitation to 
lecture at Victoria University; however, this conclusion may have 
been unkind to the students who were involved. In any case the 
visit was well worth the time and effort, since at least I had gained 
a hint about a base established on Auckland's north shore. 
Since then I have found that the base does indeed exist — and 
that very few people in this city of more than half a million are 
aware of it. A New Zealand electronics technician contacted me, for 
example, and he turned out to be one person who had access to 
the base. 
He was very interested in what I was doing and what I knew, 
"Don't you know what happens to people who know too much?" he 
warned me. Somewhat taken aback I went to some pains to explain 
to him that in the event of anything untoward happening to me, I 
had taken the precaution of making, and putting into safe keeping, 
several copies of a long list of names of people involved with the 
"experiment," and that they might be embarrassed at the inevitable 
questions that would follow a mishap to me. His question gave me 
some anxiety, but I felt fairly certain that the "group" would realise 
that putting me out of action would only draw attention to themselves. 
I put a circle around the position of the Kauri Point base on the 
map and later, out of curiosity, measured the distance in minutes of 
arc (nautical miles) to another mysterious establishment staffed by 
Americans — at Woodbourne RNZAF base, near Blenheim, in the 
South Island. 
The plotted distance was just on 288 minutes of arc, relative to 
the accuracy of the map I had access to at the time. It appeared 
that the two bases were positioned in this way for the purposes of 
setting up a harmonic geometric relating to twice the speed of light. 
My interest was immediately focused and I have believed from that 
time that there is a definite geometric connection between the two 
stations which allows electronic experimentation. 
64

[PAG 83]
65 
Recently I carried out a more accurate series of calculations, by 
computer, in relation to these two points and found much more 
persuasive 
evidence 
regarding 
a 
geometric 
connection. 
I had more mathematical data to work with, collected over many 
years, and had discovered that the seemingly obvious did not always 
turn out to be the right answer. 
One of the interesting facts I had discovered was that I could 
shift the harmonic values up, or down, the scale by multiplying or 
dividing by 6, or 60. We normally use degrees, minutes, or seconds 
in arc measure, relative to the Earth's surface, but equivalent geo- 
metric wave-lengths can be increased, or decreased, below or above 
these normal values. In fact the ones above can be decreased in 
length an infinite number of times for the creation of very high 
frequency transmissions. 
I applied this exercise to the computed distance between the two 
stations, as follows: 
Distance between stations: 
Distance    —  284.9006 minutes of arc (nautical miles). 
Multiplied by 6 : nine times. 
2.871149 
The square root of the 2871140 harmonic is equal to: 
1694444 harmonic. 
The latitudinal displacement between the two stations was com- 
puted to be: 
4.706666 degrees. 
which equals 
16944 seconds of arc. (harmonic). 
The longitude of Kauri Point is equal to: 
174° 421 
If we subtract 90° from this value to ascertain the position of 
Kauri Point within the appropriate 90° sector, we have: 
84° 42' 
Which equals: 
84.7° 
Which is a half harmonic of: 
169.4   (harmonic) 
I am not sure how accurate this value has to be, for practical 
application, but it has been found that this particular harmonic 
(169444) has a direct connection with communication; particularly 
space communication.   See the last chapter; Wake Up Earth.

[PAG 84]
66 
The 
circumference 
of 
the 
latitude 
which 
passes 
through 
the 
Woodbourne position is 269.53 degrees, relative to the equator, which 
could be associated with the harmonic values derived from the uni- 
fied equations. 
All the evidence suggests a use of very accurately computed 
geometric positions for the purpose of extremely advanced scientific 
experimentaion. If so, New Zealand is very strategically placed on 
the Earth's surface. 
A further interesting factor was that the geometric co-ordinates 
connecting the Kauri Point station to the points at which massive 
explosions had occurred (Rosebank Road and Rutland Street, 1 and 
2 respectively on the map) were equal. A line between the two 
explosion points, in other words, was the base-line of an isoscelss 
triangle, the apex of which was the Kauri Point position. 
I checked the length of the base-line and found that the distance 
between the two explosions was 288 seconds of arc, or twice the 
speed of light harmonic, subject to the accuracy of the plot. 
Further, if the isosceles triangle so formed were to be bisected 
(which is shown by line 8 — 32 on the map), then the co-ordinate 
8 — 32 was equal to co-ordinate 32 — 4. Position 4 is that of a UFO 
sighted hovering behind a house in Inverary Road, Epsom (a veri- 
fied sighting). Could this be yet another coincidence? I could hardly 
believe so. The angle formed by 1 — 8 and 2, is equal to 288,000 
seconds of arc, subject to the accuracy of the plot, which is also a 
harmonic of twice the speed of light. 
I have recently studied this pattern again, at some length, and 
again, subject to the accuracy of the plot. I believe the following 
geometric co-ordinates are built into the system. 
A radius with the centre at position 8, and passing through positions 
1 and 2 would have a length of 231.48147 seconds of arc. If we 
multiply this value by 6 to shift the harmonic up the scale, then we 
produce the harmonic 13888.888. This is twice the harmonic of 
6944.444, which is the reciprocal of the speed of light. 
The circumference of a circle formed by this radius would be 
1454.441 seconds of arc (relative). If we multiply this value by 
6x6x6 then we produce the value 314159.27, which is the direct 
harmonic of Pi., or 3.1415927.   Quite remarkable. 
9. This is where we discovered the first aerial of the network, as 
described in Chapter 3. It was from this point that the whole 
aerial 
investigation 
started. 
The 
first 
geometric 
line-up 
we 
found was 9-2-4, 2 and 4 being two UFO positions previously

[PAG 85]
MAP 5 
 
Shows refined section of grid A over the city of Auckland, New 
Zealand.    Circles show positions of UFO activity.   See grid 
map 
showing 
positions 
of 
man-made 
transmitting 
stations. 
(Original map published in Harmonic 33,) 
67

[PAG 86]
68 
plotted. Other co-ordinates from 9 are: 9-30-11, 9-8-16-17, and 
9-6-28. It would appear that these line-ups, then, are not just 
accidental. 
Positions 10, and from 13 through 29, are all man-made trans- 
mitter 
stations 
which 
have 
sophisticated 
aerial 
systems 
attached to them. Photographs have been taken of each, and 
copies are filed away in a variety of safe places. The geomet- 
ric patterns produced by connecting all the stations show definite 
evidence of linkage. The harmonics involved are complex, and 
I 
shall 
leave 
their 
solution 
for 
mathematically-inclined 
read 
ers. The various angles formed by intersecting lines also have 
harmonic association. 
Positions 11 and 12 appear to be two major stations.   They fall 
within the area of the Waitakere Mountains, to the west of Auck- 
land, and the aerial masts can be seen from some miles distant. It 
may be argued that it is purely coincidental that the stations are in 
geometric alignment with others on the map — but if coincidence is 
the answer, I dare say no one will have any objection to my having 
free access to the buildings in order to photograph and study the 
electronic equipment installed within.  One of the buildings, by the 
way, is constructed like a fortress. 
Finally, on the map I have plotted positions 30 and 31, which I 
believe to be sites where some type of transmitting equipment will 
be set up in the future. The distance between these points is equiva- 
lent to eight times the speed of light harmonic of 1439, or 8C. The 
square root of this value is 3.3927. The harmonic of 3927 is incor- 
porated in this group of figures. I had earlier found that a harmonic 
of 3393 was one of many used in the detonation of an atomic bomb.1 
Activity of an odd variety has already been observed around these 
two positions, and a close watch will be kept to see what eventuates. 
Aerials are still appearing, but we shall not complicate the map 
any further. We, and the many people who have aided us in our 
investigations, believe that there is more than sufficient evidence 
here already to support our demand for a full and open investiga- 
tion into the whole system which of course is not confined to Auck- 
land but is spread throughout New Zealand. 
Who is in charge of the "experiment?"  Where do the necessary 
funds come from?  What is the intention of those in control of the 
system, when the work is complete and all the answers are in? Will 
they 
then 
tell 
us 
the 
full 
story 
about 
the 
UFOs? 
Frankly, I doubt it. 
13393 is the term 33927 corrected to four-figure accuracy

[PAG 87]
7>   MATHEMATICAL VALUES OF INTEREST 
69 
IN MY EARLIER WORK I SHOWED THE VARIOUS STEPS 
I went through in my research which eventually led me to a 
unified equation based on the harmonic of the speed of light, 
and the Einstein equation E = MC2.   The equation indicated to me 
that all the physical substances in the universe were formed from 
 the harmonic frequencies of light in various interlocking geometric 
terns.   All matter, be it a star, a planet, or the structure of the 
atom, 
is 
formed 
by 
the 
harmonic 
resonance 
of 
light. 
A very rough analogy of how light is individualised into a physi- 
cal substance from the universal matrix, would be to liken the uni- 
verse to a vast ocean.   If a vortex or whirlpool is created in the 
ocean, then a small portion of it has been transformed into some- 
thing quite different from the main mass. The area enclosed by the 
vertex operates under a different set of geometric laws. The change 
in state is caused by a spiraling motion being imparted by the influence 
of her forces. 
I believe that the forces which cause a vortex to form in the 
universe matrix are manifested by the interaction between the uni- 
verse and anti-universe.   In other words the interaction, or pulsa- 
tion, between matter and antimatter causes the creation, or disso- 
tiation, of substance.    This idea conforms with the "steady state" 
theory of the universe. Many scientists believe that matter is being 
continuously created and destroyed, maintaining a constant supply 
of material in the physical universe. 
Is it possible that light reciprocal harmonics from the anti-uni- 
verse  interact  with  the  pure  light harmonics   of our  physical 
universe to form resonances which create matter?  If this is so then 
we must look for the reciprocal light harmonic of 6944 within the 
geometric structure of spherical mass formation in all parts of the 
universe.  If this applies to the largest planet, or star, then it must 
also apply to the spherical structure of the atom. 
The geometric or universal value by which we can measure 
spherical bodies, regardless of size, is angular measurement.   The 
constant factor for the circumference in all cases is 360 degrees, 
or 21,600 minutes of arc.    In respect to the earth we call the 
surface  distance  of one  minute  of arc  one  nautical mile,  but

[PAG 88]
70 
the actual physical distance would naturally vary with the size of 
the body. 
If we consider the diameter of all spherical bodies to be also 
measured in units of arc values, equal to those of the surface then 
we find that the constant value for diameter is 6875.493542. This 
could be termed the harmonic diameter for all spherical bodies. To 
bring this body into being from the universal matrix, vortexual 
action must be initiated and the body built up from fundamental 
particles. We would expect some sort of rarefied gaseous stage at 
the periphery of the body graduating to a more dense atomic struc- 
ture, until a solid body manifests which gets much more dense 
towards its centre. 
From this we see that in our hunt for the light reciprocal har- 
monic which actually creates the spherical body, we must not only 
consider the solid body itself but also the rarified gaseous or atomic 
particle, envelope around it, as this also has mass. 
If we take the earth as an example we find that many differenlt 
layers extend outward from the surface, getting increasingly rarefied 
with altitude. First of all the troposphere, where three quarters of the 
bulk of the whole envelope is concentrated. This consists of 78 per 
cent nitrogen, 21 per cent oxygen, 0.9 percent argon, 0.3 per cent 
carbon dioxide, with traces of several other gases plus copious 
quantities of water vapour. Next is the stratosphere and the meso- 
sphere, which extend up to about 50 miles. The stratosphere consists 
in part of ozone or heavy oxygen formed by electrical discharges, or 
strong ultra-violet rays, passing through ordinary oxygen. At about 
50 miles, up to between 350-600 miles, is the ionosphere, where X- 
rays and ultra-violet rays from the sun ionise the rarefied air. This 
produces electrically charged atoms and molecules, together with 
unattached electrons. This area contains only 0.001 per cent, by 
weight, of the atmosphere. The outermost layer is the exosphere, 
where sub-atomic particles are found, plus a 900-mile layer of thinly 
dispersed helium surrounded by a layer of hydrogen that extends 
4000 miles into space. The atoms are so far apart in this area that 
they very seldom collide, which gives some idea of the density. 
As can be seen from this, if my theory is correct, hydrogen is the 
first type of material to be manifested from the universal substance 
then the heavier gases close to the earth's surface; and finally the 
solid matter of the earth itself. 
The geometric harmonic diameter of the earth could then be 
extended   to   encompass   the   main   mass   of  the   surrounding

[PAG 89]
71 
atmospheric envelope to see if the harmonic reciprocal of light is 
evident. 
If we  add the harmonic  equivalent  of 6875.493542,  namely 
68.7593542, to the diameter to encompass the atmosphere we get 
6875.493542 
68.75493542 
6944.24847742 
As 6944 is the harmonic reciprocal of the speed of light in free 
space, it appears possible that spherical bodies are in fact formed by 
some sort of vortexual resonance which causes precipitation of matter. 
In the initial stages of formation are the rarefied gases; then, as the 
harmonic vibration intensifies to the point that it matches that of 
the light reciprocal, the more dense substances are built up. Finally 
at 
certain 
harmonic 
values 
solid 
substances 
occur. 
If this is so then, in my theory, every spatial body must have 
some sort of gaseous, or ionic, envelope surrounding it.   I should 
imagine that in the case of the planets, the type of gaseous envelope 
would depend on the orbital radius from the central sun or star. 
The orbital values would set up secondary harmonics which would 
modify 
the 
geometric 
makeup 
of 
the 
surrounding 
atmosphere. 
It follows that all planets in the universe that have similar size 
and orbital radius to earth would have the same type of atmosphere 
and other characteristics.   Accordingly there must be millions of 
planets which could be habitable for man. The ratio of the diameter 
of aplanet to the height of the main bulk of its atmosphere would 
be 200:1. 
Shortly after I published my second book I had a visit from an 
Australian who passed some information to me in regards to straight 
and curved line geometry.  He was a most intense sort of chap and 
I still don't know the reason behind the visit, or the connections he 
has in his own country, but the information was most interesting. 
He left me quite a few notes, saying that I could make use of them 
as I saw fit. Possibly I can use the data in some future research but 
a small portion I will quote here: 
Straight and curved line geometry; the globe and the disc.   By 
choosing a single universal measurement unit we are able to con- 
vert directly from units of length to angles of geometry and back 
again. Taking the earth as a globe we see it has a circumference 
of 21,600 minutes of arc (or nautical miles) and a diameter of 6875.493

[PAG 90]
DIAGRAM 5 
Showing that all spherical bodies have a harmonic affinity with the 
harmonic reciprocal of the speed of light. 
 
Harmonic of the speed of light = 144/harmonic reciprocal = 6944. In 
geometric measurement the circumference of all spherical bodies is 360 
degrees, or 21,600 minutes of arc. The diameter of all spherical bodies, in  
he same minute of arc units, can be expressed as a constant of 6875.493542  
minutes of arc. If this value is then considered as a harmonic, and extended 
by the equivalent harmonic of 68.75493542, the resultant value becomes 
6944.248477; the light reciprocal. The application of this harmonic diameter 
to all planetary bodies in space would account for the mass of the planet and 
the surrounding atmosphere. The constant of 6875.493542 minutes of arc 
for the diameter, and a constant of 34.377468 minutes of arc for the height 
of the atmosphere above surface level. (Roughly 39.5 statute miles. This 
would extend to the mesosphere if applied to the atmosphere of the earth. 
Above this level would be the ionosphere and the exosphere.) 
72

[PAG 91]
minutes of arc. It is stated in this theory that every globe has an 
equivalent disc which is equal to it. The best way to imagine this 
equivalent disc is to liken it to a globe which has been put into a 
giant press and squashed flat at the equator. 
What we are interested in is the ratio of the dimensions of the 
globe; radius, diameter, circumference etc., to those of its equivalent 
disc. It is found that the diameter of the disc is equal to one half 
the circumference of the globe, and the circumference of the disc is 
one half of pi times that of the circumference of the globe. 
As a globe the circumference = 21,600 nautical miles 
As a disc the diameter           = 10800 nautical miles 
As a disc the circumference    = 33929.2 nautical miles 
The circumference as a disc is 1.5707963 times the circumference 
as a globe, or half of pi. 
This is a very interesting fact because my visitor is saying that 
the earth grid, as I discovered it, seems to be based on the possibil- 
lity of one geometry switching over to another geometry.   The idea 
of gravity being a force appears to be a fallacy.   In reality it seems 
to be simply a state of tension, or a ratio between the two geome- 
tries. I found in my earlier research that this geometric harmonic 
of 33929.2 was one of the factors in the positioning and detonation 
of an atomic device. 
Next let us look at measurement itself. We are led to believe that 
all systems of measurement, as used today, are purely arbitrary 
values set up by man himself and therefore a fairly haphazard way 
of finding quantities or dimensions of things.  British measurement 
for example was purported to be a jumble of bits and pieces related 
to man's own dimensions.   The inch was an eighteenth of a cubit, 
of the breadth of a thumb.  The cubit was measured from the point 
of the elbow to the outstretched tip of the middle finger.   The foot 
was about two-thirds of a cubit, four palms, twelve thumbs, or sixteen 
digits. The digit was the width of the middle of the middle finger. 
The meridian mile was 4000 cubits.   I'm not sure where all these 
ideas originated, but I believe them to be pretty ridiculous, even 
though they are taught in our schools today.   How many human 
beings, taken at random, would conform to these particular dimen- 
sions? We would have some peculiar-looking buildings around our 
cities if we standardised the construction measurements on the thin, 
fat, short or tall citizens who lived within them.

[PAG 92]
I consider that there is evidence which suggests British measure- 
ment was originally based on geometric concepts. If this can be 
proved then it follows that this method of measurement could be 
used in a universal sense, to harmonise structures to natural law. 
The first indications of this can be seen in the design factors of the 
Great Pyramid. 
A pyramid, or geodetic inch, is equal to 1.0011 British inches 
Could it be that in ancient times a pyramid inch and the British 
inch were equal to each other and some how derived from a geomet- 
ric value associated with the light harmonic of 144? If so, then our 
ancestors were scientifically advanced to a much greater degree 
than we give them credit for. 
In 1635 the author of Sea-Man's Practice, Richard Norwood, using 
a sextant of more than five feet in radius, made observations of the 
sun at two points which were 9149 chains apart and found a value 
of 69.5 statute miles for one degree of latitude. In 1671 the French 
astronomer Jean Picard, by means of trigonometry, was able to 
obtain a fairly accurate value of 69.1 statute miles. Newton made 
use of this value to complete his general theory of gravitation. 
The figure generally taken for the circumference of the earth as 
the equator is 25,000 statute miles. If we divide this by 360 to find 
the number of miles in one degree the answer is 69.444. Taking 
everything else into consideration I'm sure this is not just coinci- 
dence. The value of 69444 is obviously the reciprocal of the speed 
of light harmonic. 
A serious study of the origins of British standards of measure 
ments could be of extreme interest and possibly many of our history 
books would have to be rewritten as a result. 
The measure of one geodetic foot, equal to one six-thousandth 
part of a terrestrial minute of arc, which is equal to one grid foot, was 
proposed in early 1700 by Cassini. If this had been the standard 
accepted it would have been equal to the ancient Greek foot, which 
was five-sixth of a remen.  The Parthenon was laid out to this unit 
The French metre could be taken as a fairly close scientific method 
of measuring. The standard was taken as one ten-millionth part of 
the length of a quadrant of the meridian measured through Paris 
This was established reasonably accurately in 1798 and is the equiva- 
lent of 39.37 British inches. As British measurement itself appears 
to be based on a geodetic equivalent, this value of 39.37 could be 
close to a harmonic equivalent of the resultant earth magnetic field 
Some work in this direction might prove to be worth while.   The 
74

[PAG 93]
75 
British and metric systems could probably be complementary to 
each other. 
Another ancient measurement of interest is the megalithic yard 
of 2.72 British feet, discovered by A. Thorn.  The unit is considered 
to be of Egyptian origin as it is found in the geometrical canon of 
Egyptian measures.  John Mitchell in his book The City of Revela- 
tion brings out another point in connection with this unit: "All over 
the world the traditional units of length, area, weight and capacity 
are related to each other and derive from ONE ORIGINAL CANON 
OF COSMOLOGY.   Two such are the English mile and the unit 
which now only survives in the East as the "pu" of Indo-China, its 
value given on page 358 of L. D'A. Jackson's Modern Metrology as 
2.72727 miles, the fraction recurring. Without previous knowledge 
of this unit its former existence in Britain was deduced by Mr. J. F. 
Neal from his analysis of the intervals between ancient sacred sites, 
who called it the 'megalithic mile' on account of its ratio to the mile 
being virtually the same as that of the megalithic yard to the foot. 
There are 14,400 feet in one megalithic mile. 
He points out also that the ratio between the dimensions of the 
earth and the moon is 10:2.72727.   The key point here is that one 
megalithic mile is equal to 14,400 British feet.   Again we have the 
hamonic of the speed of light, 1440, connected with British meas- 
ure. There are also mathematical indications that the unit could be 
connected in some way with the exponential function "e" which is 
taken as 2.7182818. The mathematicians could delve into this area 
with possibly interesting results.   If it can be proved that English 
measure was the only form of calculation that was harmonically 
associated with the structure of the universe and geodetic measure, 
then a crime of great magnitude would be committed if this system 
were lost to the world.   Right now the pressure is on to force the 
metric system on all countries and if this is finally accomplished the 
true system of measure will be hidden away, and only be made use 
of by the initiates. 
I believe a new system could be devised by the combination of 
geodetic and metric measure.  The standard geodetic inch and foot 
could be retained and incorporated into a measuring system which 
has a base of 10.   A basic unit could be 120 geodetic feet, which 
would accommodate the harmonics of ten and twelve.    The unit 
would be 1440 inches long which, would give the direct harmonic of 
light. Another way would be to use a basic unit of 1.2 geodetic 
inches, 
ten 
of 
which 
would 
equal 
one 
geodetic 
foot. 
■

[PAG 94]
A geometric figure which also indicates a remarkable relation- 
ship between the harmonic of light, the circle, and a system based 
on multiples of 10, is the decagon (see diagram). If a decagon, or 
ten-sided figure, is inscribed within a circle then the subtended 
angles are equivalent to 144° (the light harmonic). The angles between 
the side and the radius of the circle at each intersection are all 72 deg., 
or half the light harmonic. 
Another curious fact gleaned from my geometry books is that if 
the side A of a regular decagon, inscribed within a circle of radius 
R is laid off along that radius, the latter will be divided into the 
golden section (a ratio of 1:1.618, found to be incorporated into the 
structure of many ancient buildings). Our ancestors must have 
known something! 
The next interesting figure to have a look at is the spiral. When 
we really think about it there is no such thing as true circular 
motion at any point of the universe. This is due to the relative 
motion of all physical bodies in space. Although we may describe a 
perfect circle relative to our position on earth, the instrument used 
to describe such a circle in actual fact would carry out a spiraling 
path in relation to the universe as a whole. When we think of all 
the different movements we are subject to we realise that it is vir- 
tually impossible to calculate the path taken by a physical body 
when it moves from one spatial position to another. For instance, 
we would have to take into account the actual movement in relation 
to the earth, the spin of the earth, the movement of the earth 
around the sun, the sun's movement within our galaxy, galactic 
movement and so on. 
From all the research I have done so far I have come to the 
conclusion that during the formation of matter the wave-forms from 
which physical substance is manifest move through spiraling paths 
of 371.2766° cycles. These cycles set up a resonating pulse which 
creates a harmonic reciprocal reaction to the unified equations gov- 
erning our reality. The value for pi in relationship to the radius of 
the spiraling motion is difficult to calculate due to the multi- 
dimensional movement. But I believe the value to be 3.24; the value 
of two pi, which could allow for the double cycle of matter and 
antimatter, would then be 6.48. The square root of this figure is 
2.545584412, which is harmonically equivalent to the value built 
into the polar square section of the world grid system. 
The world grid system itself is set up in harmony with the natu- 
ral spiraling motion of the wave-forms in physical substance.   The 
76

[PAG 95]
DIAGRAM 
6 
THE HARMONICS OF A DECAGON 
 
77 
The decagon, or ten-sided figure, indicates a direct relationship between 
light, the circle, the harmonic power of 10, and the golden-section ratio of 
1.618. The subtended angles A-B-C, D-E-F, G-H-I, etc. each are equal to 
144°, giving a direct relationship with the harrronic of the speed of light. 
Each inner angle K-B-E, K-E-B, K-E-H, K-H-E, etc. is equal to 72°, or half 
the speed of light harmonic. 
If the side of a regular decagon inscribed within a circle is laid off along the 
radius, the radius will be divided into golden section. This is shown in the 
diagram by laying off the side B-E along the radius B-K. The radius is then 
divided into the ratio of 1:1.618.

[PAG 96]
main poles of the two interlocking grid systems on the earth's sur- 
face are placed at intervals on the natural spiral which coincide 
with the harmonics of the reciprocal of light. 
The north and south poles of one grid are displaced 694.4 min- 
utes of arc from the north and south geographic poles. The second 
interlocking grid has poles which are displaced 1054.4 minutes of 
arc from the geographic poles: the difference in latitude being 360 
minutes, or six degrees. The two grid pole positions, north and 
south, fall on a spiraling curve which commences at the north and 
terminates at the south geographic pole. This is probably very hard 
to visualise without the appropriate demonstration models, but suffice 
it to say that the harmonic points on the natural spiral cause sym- 
pathetic resonances to be set up which combine with those of light, 
gravity and mass. 
In Harmonic 33 I demonstrated the relationship of the position 
of Wolf Creek crater in north-western Australia to the world grid 
system. Wolf Creek crater is a massive so-called "meteor crater" 
similar to the Arizona crater in the United States. Although many 
scientists believe that these craters, and many others like them 
round the world, were gouged out by giant meteors striking the 
earth, to date no large meteor fragments have been discovered. A 
fairly good scattering of a certain type of iron has been found in the 
vicinity of some of the holes, but the combined mass of the frag 
ments would be only an infinitesimal fraction of the bulk required 
to blast out holes of such size. The presence of this pure iron could 
point to other interesting possibilities which will be discussed in a 
later chapter. 
I 
indicated 
in 
my 
earlier 
work 
that 
I 
believed 
the 
craters 
were formed by explosions from below the surface. This would 
have been caused by the instability of spiral geometries within 
the grid system. This could have been brought about by interfer- 
ence with the system in the ancient past, based on advanced 
scientific knowledge. All the evidence being compiled in modern 
times indicates that at some time round eleven to twelve thousand 
years ago a major catastrophe occurred which caused worldwide 
devastation. Some of this evidence indicates most strongly that 
atomic-type explosions occurred at various positions on the earth's 
surface. An ancient war perhaps? Or were the scientists of the 
day overreaching themselves and carrying out experiments with 
the structure of matter, without being in complete control of the 
resulting effects? 
78