=== The energy grid - Harmonic 695. The pulse of the universe (Bruce L. Cathie).pdf — CHUNK 9/12 ===
Chars: 45,000 | Offset: 355,242



[PAG 187]
169 
according to measurements published in the book Stonehenge De- 
coded, by American astronomer Gerald S. Hawkins. The author 
carried out a scientific survey of Stonehenge and of all known data 
and references to it, and then with the aid of a computer was able 
to show that the geometric arrangement of the massive stones formed 
a highly accurate astronomical clock. This study also demonstrated 
that the architects of that time had an extremely advanced knowl- 
edge of astronomy and mathematics. The measurements I give here 
are those published by Hawkins in his fascinating book. 
Of the thirty stones which once stood in the Sarsen Circle, only 
twenty-four are today in their original positions. The thirty upright 
stones were once topped by thirty lintels, mortised at each end; only 
five of the lintels remain in place.   The stones were not quarried 
locally, but were brought from a position near Newbury, some forty 
miles away. 
Outside the Sarsen Circle there was yet another circle, the Aubrey 
Circle, named after its discoverer.  What remains of this is a series 
of fifty-six evenly-spaced holes which vary in depth from two feet to 
four. The diameter of this fairly accurate circle was measured at 
288 feet, with a distance of 16 feet from one hole to the next. While 
the circle was not a perfect one, the greatest error radial-wise was 
found to be 19 inches; and around the circumference, in the spacing 
of the holes, 21 inches. 
Between the Aubrey holes and the Sarsen Circle two other 
circular patterns of holes — now named the Y holes and the Z 
holes — have been discovered.    There are thirty holes in the Y 
series, forming a circle roughly 35 feet outside the Sarsen Circle, 
and in the Z series twenty-nine holes, from 5 to 15 feet beyond the 
Sarsen Circle.   The holes are not regularly spaced.   Excavation of 
each hole brought to light a single blue-stone fragment of the rhy- 
olite variety. 
Further descriptions and measurements of the Stonehenge complex 
would fill a volume; but the above information was of vital interest 
to me.  Coupled with the discovery by Mr. Williams of what seemed 
to be a form of radiation issuing from the large stones, Hawkin's 
work helps one to form a clearer picture of the possible purpose of 
the geometric pattern of the quartz stones. 
The diameter of the Aubrey circle is of significance. The average 
diameter is given as 288 feet. I feel sure that if a precise check were 
to be made, the true measurement would be found to be 287.8 grid 
feet; a grid foot being a fraction larger than a standard foot.  As is

[PAG 188]
170 
shown elsewhere in this book, the value of 2878 is equal to 2C, that 
is twice the speed of light harmonic of 1439. 
Next, we note that the Sarsen Circle had thirty standing stones; 
thirty is also the basic spacing of the UFO grid system. The diame- 
ter of the circle is given as 97 feet 4 inches. It is not indicated 
whether the measurement is taken from the edge or from the centre 
of the stone uprights. Again I have a hunch that if the measure- 
ment is again checked and translated into grid feet it will come to 
96.6 feet, which would give a radius for the Sarsen Circle of 48.3 
grid feet. As shown elsewhere, the square of the speed of light 
reciprocal harmonic of 695 is equal to 483. 
It appears as though Stonehenge was constructed to the univer- 
sal geometric harmonics of light itself.   The radius of the Aubrey 
Circle is that of the speed of light; the radius of the Sarsen Circle 
corresponds to the square of the reciprocal of the speed of light. 
And what of the fact that the large stones appear to be of a 
crystalline structure, and apparently emit a form of radiation, as 
shown by the fogging effect on the photographs taken by Williams? 
He himself suggests that the quartz crystal is similar to that used 
in the early crystal type of radio much revered by small boys in 
years gone by — myself included. I believe he is very close to the 
truth. The small chips of blue-stone found in the Y and Z holes 
could also have a crystalline structure and be caused to resonate to 
harmonic fields set up by the inner and outer circles based on the 
harmonics of the angular velocity of light itself. 
Could Stonehenge have been designed as a gigantic crystal set? 
A massive geometric device constructed in ancient times to serve as 
a transmitter and receiver of signals from the heavens?   This I 
believe to be a probability, not just a possibility. 
There is still further evidence pointing towards this. When men 
build a modern radar station on a flat ground level site it is neces- 
sary to surround the central radar scanner with a circular earthen 
wall in order to create an artificial horizon. This low barrier cuts 
out all random clutter from the radar screen, and provides the operator 
with a positive horizon from which to calculate angular altitude. 
Stonehenge, too, is surrounded by a similar wall although it is 
formed of the ubiquitous chalk that is found in abundance in this 
part of England. The chalk mound forms the rim of a circle some 
320 feet in diameter. This white wall, when it was first built, must 
have been some 20 feet wide and 6 feet high, according to measure- 
ments of its remains.

[PAG 189]
171 
 The fifty-six Aubrey holes were also filled with chalk rubble, 
so perhaps there  is  some kind  of electromagnetic  affinity be- 
tween the molecules of chalk and the quartz crystal in the stones 
of the Sarsen Circle, and the stone chips placed in the Y and 
Z 
holes. 
Another type of modern   electronic equipment is a navigation 
device used for aircraft, and known as VOR, standing for Very High 
Frequency Omni-directional Range Station. The equipment consists 
of a ground station, and special apparatus in an aircraft which 
analyses signals transmitted from the station.   By constant vari- 
ation of the phasing of the signals transmitted from the ground 
station, the equipment in the aircraft can lock on to individual, one- 
degree radials from the station.    By this means an aircraft can 
either fly away from or towards the ground station on definite, set 
magnetic headings. 
It is perfectly possible that Stonehenge was an ancient equiva- 
lent of the  modern VOR  station.     The   Sarsen  Circle's  thirty 
quartz upright stones may be likened to thirty radial high-frequency 
transmitters.      The   fifty-six   Aubrey   holes   may   have   set   up 
certain  interference  patterns,  with  signals  being  emitted from 
the tuned  crystals in the  Sarsen  stones.     Many permutations 
would result when the radiating patterns of the  signals from 
the Aubrey holes and the thirty Sarsen stones were combined, 
which could have set up a very great number of electromagnetic 
radialsfor navigational purposes.    Such signals would travel far 
 out into space, as they would have been tuned to the harmonic 
of 
light 
itself, 
Something else of great significance to me was revealed in the 
Hawkins book.  He refers to a certain line-up of stones, revealed by 
computer 
analysis, 
at 
equinox 
sunset. 
When positions designated by Hawkins at "94" and "C" are lined 
up with the sun, the displacement in azimuth clockwise from north, 
in degrees, is given as 269.5!   Here we have the harmonic of 2695 
showing up again: better still, it is the result of a computer pro- 
gramme.   Could this be merely chance, as scientists insist?   How 
many chances am I allowed before someone in authority will admit 
publicly that perhaps — even a qualified perhaps — I just may have 
discovered something — something that may turn out to be of im- 
mense value to mankind. 
Stonehenge could have been both a cosmic clock and a naviga- 
tional ground station. To produce the harmonic resonance required

[PAG 190]
172 
to cause radiation from the stones, the geometric pattern must be 
aligned astronomically with certain key positions related to the sun 
and  moon;  thus  a two-fold purpose  can  be  attributed  to the 
Stonehenge system. 
More evidence of what I have suggested here is sure to come to 
light in the future, but I believe enough has already been presented 
to suggest that a closer examination of the inherent mathematics of 
Stonehenge will uncover a veritable goldmine of information. I 
admit the possibility that in fact scientists have already done ex- 
actly this; the fact that we, the public, have heard nothing from 
them would be nothing unusual. 
Another line of research which would be equally rewarding would 
be a mathematical probing of the Great Pyramid, of course carried 
out using the harmonic measurements inherent in the UFO grid. 
May I remind you that the word "pyramid" has the literal meaning 
"measure of light." 
One day, hopefully in my own lifetime, an academy will be estab- 
lished of scientists whose only allegiance will be to the truth, and 
to the reporting of the truth to the public, and whose principal 
functions will be to undertake research on the ancient monuments 
whose secrets we have never been able to properly plumb. 
Any true man of science would already have taken recognition of 
the facts and figures I have pointed out in this chapter. He would 
already have undertaken research along these exciting paths. 
The monuments of ancient times bulk large; they stare us in the 
face; their secrets defy us. 
The human response is to shrug them off. 
"Merely temples and places of worship, erected by slave labour," 
is the "explanation" that we generally get. 
Somewhere there may be surviving masters of the ancient world, 
enjoying 
a 
quiet 
chuckle 
at 
our 
obstinate 
blindness. 
NOTE: 
Since the publication of this book I have carried out a furher 
probe into the mathematical structure of Stonehenge with the aid of 
a calculator. I have found that the values, as shown, although only 
to four-figure accuracy, are indeed built into the complex. A com- 
plete mathematical breakdown of the concentric circular patterns 
the spacing of the standing stones and the Aubrey Holes, has been 
accomplished, and the findings show that the values are in accord 
with those demonstrated in the harmonic unified equations. There 
is now no doubt in my mind that this structure is of immense

[PAG 191]
173 
I 
scientific importance, and that the understanding of the mathemati- 
cal message, inherent within the geometric pattern of the stones 
will 
one 
day 
enable 
man 
to 
conquer 
the 
universe. 
It is my intention to publish this data in a later book.

[PAG 192]
19>   FROM ALPHA TO OMEGA 
174 
ALPHA 
CENTAURI, 
THAT 
CURIOUS 
STAR 
MILLIONS 
of light-years  from   earth  which  has   excited   scientists 
because of radio signals that apparently originate at its sur- 
face, may well be one of the goals of the space age.    One of the 
scientific crutches that will help our first space travellers to limp to 
that destination may well be Omega. 
For well over a year controversy raged in New Zealand as to 
whether the aerials of an Omega navigational station should be 
permitted to decorate one of the picturesque South Island valleys, 
like a gigantic web spun by some psychotic spider (see diagram). 
Reports and comments have been thrown about, words have been 
distorted and quoted out of context to support one or another par- 
tisan cause, and evasions at Government level have done nothing to 
help clarify the Omega story. Mainly the controversy has centred 
around this point: would an Omega station assist Polaris subma- 
rines? If so, would not such a station become a primary target in 
the event of a major war, even if New Zealand were neutral? 
Eight of these so-called navigational radio stations are to be 
positioned in various localities around the world; the South Island 
of New Zealand was selected as the location forone of them. Already 
there are four stations in operation — in Norway, Trinidad, Hawaii 
and near New York. 
Supposedly, the full system of eight stations is to be set up for 
the sole purpose of providing a global navigational network for ship- 
ping, submarines and aircraft. No doubt the Omega stations will 
fulfil this purpose at maximum efficiency, as the concept is certainly 
far in advance of the wartime system known as LORAN, or long- 
range navigation. 
Simultaneous readings from these or additional stations will give 
a position on any point of the earth's surface within a half-mile 
accuracy. 
However, a very large number of New Zealanders, including sci- 
entists, university professors and the general public, have expressed 
a fear that the installation of such a station in New Zealand would 
immediately make this country vulnerable to nuclear attack in the 
event of World War III.   The fear comes from the belief, erroneous

[PAG 193]
175 
 
THE 
BASIC 
OMEGA 
TRANSMITTER 
A The aerial transmitter 10 kw. 
B Carrier wires improve efficiency of aerial A but do not transmit. 
C Small control hut. 
The wrist-thick wire aerial is the only part transmitting. If a station is built 
on 
flat land a 1000 ft. high aerial is set up with an umbrella-shaped web of 
supporting 
wires around it, and the cost is much more than that of the mountain-slung 
aerial 
shown. 
or not, that the hidden purpose of Omega is to enable nuclear sub- 
marines to obtain accurate fixes of position while still submerged, in 
order to carry out an attack.   If this were true, then any country 
with such a station would obviously become a priority — A target 
for the enemy. 
But 
is 
this 
the 
real 
purpose 
of 
Omega, 
in 
fact? 
Possibly, but not probably. Nuclear submarines do not need this 
type of system. Inertial navigation systems already in use are far 
more accurate and reliable, and cannot be tampered with by any 
hostile nation or its agents. The official voice on Omega is speaking 
accurately when it declares that Omega is not essential for military

[PAG 194]
forces of any nation. 
Then why should the Americans be so very anxious to establish 
Omega stations in other countries, and against the popular wishes 
of the people of those countries? There is certainly a widespread 
belief that something is being concealed about the Omega plan, and 
that all the facts are not being revealed. Already the press has 
informed us that persons involved with the operations of these

[PAG 195]
stations will be covered by the Official Secrets Act (New Zealand 
Herald, 2 July 1968).  Would this be reasonable if Omega were not 
of a military nature?   I for one do not believe so.   Then can there 
be some other reason besides the officially stated one for building a 
particular station at a particular position? 
As might be expected, a rather large shoal of red herrings has 
confused the whole Omega issue even further — deliberately, I sus- 
pect.   Three different "likely" sites for New Zealand's Omega were 
selected for assessment in the South Island, and a couple more were 
suggested for localities in South Australia for good measure.  When 
the normally easy-going New Zealand public began to show signs of 
uneasiness about the project, inferences were given by way of the 
daily press that the Omega project would be handed over to Austra- 
lia, with the station to be built in New South Wales or Tasmania. 
This possible switch in plans may have been designed to have a 
psychological appeal to the New Zealand public; the implication was 
that New Zealand was being so difficult over the whole affair that 
this peaceful little dominion didn't jolly well deserve an Omega 
station, so Uncle Sam would give it to Australia instead. 
If this indeed was the ruse, it was not altogether a howling 
success: the public tended to breathe a little more easily at the 
thought that after all their country would not become a potential 
target; but still there were loud demands that the Government should 
turn down any offer for Omega, even if the station were to be pre- 
sented as a gift. Let the Aussies have it, by all means; who wants 
a wooden horse sitting in their back yard? 
There 
were 
months 
of 
this 
argument 
and 
counter-argument. 
Everyone got into the act, including university students who pa- 
raded carrying anti-Omega placards. Eventually some decision had been 
to be made.   It was announced that a site close to Lake Pearson in 
New Zealand's South Island had been chosen for Omega.   This lo- 
cality happened to be the "cheapest" one "assessed" right from the 
beginning. 
The decision came as no surprise.    Back in 1968 I had been 
approached by a group of university students who asked me to plot 
the proposed positions assessed for the station, to see if there was 
any connection with the UFO grid which I had discovered, of if 
there were any other geometric evidence to explain Omega as any- 
thing other than a sophisticated civilian navigational system. 
I informed the students that I was not particularly interested in 
their battle over the Omega issue, as I had more than enough 
176

[PAG 196]
177 
evidence of my own to check into regarding UFO activity without 
getting mixed up in what had all the earmarks of becoming a politi- 
cal free-for-all. 
All the same, I did make a rough check of the geometric positions 
of the sites that had been mentioned, and I found that the Lake 
Pearson area was the only one that showed any connection with 
grid harmonics. I left it at that, after telling the students that I had 
no further interest in the matter. If this was indeed the area which 
was eventually to be selected, then, at that time, I might become a 
little more interested. 
In April 1969 the decision was announced: Lake Pearson was to 
be the site of the Omega station.  The scientists had sifted through 
all the pros and cons for this site and that and, they said, Lake 
Pearson was the one — the most magnificent and suitable location 
upon which to place the box of tricks reverently called Omega. 
Sonow I was most definitely interested.   Out came my worn 
maps and log tables. 
The latitude and longitude of the lake were checked once more, 
and a recalculation made of the harmonic probabilities of the area. 
I was convinced that the scientists were up to something that they 
had no intentions of revealing to the public at large. 
I calculated a position just north-north-west of the lake which I 
thought to be a likely site for the station, and forwarded the infor- 
mation to the air attache at the American Embassy in Wellington, 
in the hope of sparking some sort of comment from somebody in 
authority there. I was not sure what harmonic principle the station 
would be built to incorporate so I had to work by hunch alone. 
However, I was certain that when the exact sight was known a 
mathematical connection with the grid system would be evident.  A 
direct answer was not forthcoming, but a few weeks later I met the 
air attache by chance in Auckland and he told me that the calcula- 
tions I had sent to Wellington were "not too bad." I felt that at least 
I was getting close. 
Some months later I received further information and found that 
the position I had chosen was evidently an error.  Canta, the news- 
paper published by the Students' Association of Canterbury Uni- 
versity, published a lengthy article on the Omega issue, and their 
illusration of a rough map (see map) showed the actual position to 
be at the south-eastern end of the lake. 
The area where the aerial was to be suspended was enclosed by 
four mountains.   At the northern end, Purple Hill (5505 ft) and

[PAG 197]
MAP 7 
Photocopy of article in University of Canterbury newspaper Canta. 
178

[PAG 198]
179 
Mt. St. Bernard (5119 ft); and at the southern end, Constitution Hill 
(4409 ft) and Broken Hill. 
Local residents believe that the two-mile aerial will be slung 
somewhere between Purple Hill and Constitution Hill.  The proper- 
ties at either end of the aerial were said to be leased from the 
University of Canterbury itself (Educational Reserve 1577). It seemed 
to me that it was quite a coincidence that the land to be used was 
university owned. In any event, the Canta report spelled out for me 
a very small area which I would easily be able to check in order to 
find 
any 
interesting 
mathematical 
harmonics. 
My original calculations, as published in my earlier work, Har- 
monic 695, indicated that the most likely position of the aerial would 
be: 43° 08' 09.6" south / 171° 48' 43.9" east. The associated geomet- 
ric harmonics were found to be closely related to reciprocal values 
of the speed of light and time, according to the accuracy of my work 
at that period. 
I have extended my research considerably since then and now 
have access to computers which help to simplify the work and allow 
a wider coverage of all the geometric parameters discovered so far 
in the search for harmonic relationships. The best theoretical po- 
sition, according to present knowledge, calculated by computer, would 
be: 
43° 08' 37.61" south / 171° 48' 20.653" east. 
Recent research has indicated that the latitudes of several scien- 
tific stations have been calculated in such a way that the relative 
displacements from the Equator and the North, or South Pole, will 
create 
a 
geometric 
harmonic. 
So, the latitude of 43° 08' 37.61", or, 43.14378 degrees would have 
a displacement as follows: 
Distance from the South Pole    =    46.85622 degrees 
Distance from the Equator        =     43.14378 degrees 
Difference                                 =    3.712440 degrees 
The 
harmonic 
371244 
is 
the 
mathematical 
reciprocal 
of 
the 
geometric 
value 
derived 
from 
the 
Unified 
Equation: 
2693645. 
The position, because of the latitude, would allow a tuned electro- 
magnetic 
wave 
transmission 
to 
resonate 
in 
harmony 
with 
the 
Unified Fields. (These values are explained more fully in my later 
book. "The Bridge to Infinity, Harmonic 371244".)

[PAG 199]
180 
The longitude position also created an interesting harmonc. As 
all calculations are related to each section of 90 degrees we process 
the longitude as follows: 
171.805737 degrees 
minus         90.000000 degrees 
81.805737 degrees 
The Tangent of this angle is : 
6.94444 
The harmonic 694444 is the reciprocal value of the speed of light 
in free space, 144,000 minutes of arc per grid second, relative to the 
Earth's surface. 
A further harmonic is evident in the relationship of the transmit- 
ter to the North Grid Pole at: 
78° 25' 33.33" north / 105° 00' 00" west. 
The great circle distance between the two points (accurate to 
within 0.45 minutes on the computer) is 7844.6296 minutes of arc, 
or nautical miles. 
If this value is multiplied by 6, three times, in order to raise the 
harmonic, a value of 1694440 is found. Recent research indicates a 
direct association of this harmonic with mass, gravity and commu- 
nication. 
The communication harmonic would also, in theory, be built into 
the aerial system itself and a further exercise on the computer 
suggests the following: 
Height of aerial given as: 
1,000 feet 
A theoretical value of: 
996.72393 feet would be equal to: 
0.1639348 minutes of arc, relative. 
Multiply by six twice to raise the harmonic: 
5.9016548 
Which is the reciprocal harmonic of: 
0.169444 (communication). 
During March 1971 it was announced in a New Zealand newspa- 
per; that the Americans had finally decided that the Omega Station 
would not be established in New Zealand.

[PAG 200]
On Friday, August 11, 1978, an Australian Newspaper published 
an article which stated in part: 
"Federal 
Government 
will 
call 
tenders 
tomorrow 
for 
an 
Omega Navigation Station to be built at Darriman, in 
Gippsland----------The building is expected to be ready in 
mid 
1980 
and 
the 
station 
is 
scheduled 
to 
be 
operational 
before the end of 1980. 
It will have a 427 metre high steel lattice tower to carry 
the antenna system. 
The 
antenna 
system 
comprises 
16 
cables 
supported 
from 
the 
top 
and 
extending 
to 
the 
ground 
about 
730 
metres 
from the base in an evenly spaced array". 
I will leave my readers to hunt out the exact location of this one 
calculate the appropriate harmonics.   I would be interested in 
any results which look promising. 
Once I had taken a good hard look at my theoretical calculations 
and felt some satisfaction with the results, I thought the next steps 
would be to put the station into my original grid map to see just how 
it fitted into the system. 
The various positions I have calculated over the years have all 
been within a few hundred feet of each other so the relationship to 
the World Grid System remains the same on the large scale map. 
It at once became obvious that the position was an ideal one. 
The station fitted on to the grid as though one had been tailor-made 
for the other (see map). I produced the grid map years before 
Omega was ever heard of, and I have no claims to being clairvoyant. 
It can be no accident that the site fits in so neatly with the grid 
system; I'm certain that the station was planned years ago by those 
in charge of the earth-bound project to explore the grid system. 
From Alpha to Omega — from the beginning to the end; from 
earth to the stars. 
There are some on this planet who already have possession of all 
the neccessary knowledge to make citizens of space of us all. 
When will they let us in on the secret? 
181

[PAG 201]
MAP 8 
 
Section of original grid map published in Harmonic 33 (1968). 
Calculated position of Omega station plotted into map in August 1970 
shows 
possible correlation with UFO grid.

[PAG 202]
20>   THERE IS SOMETHING IN THE AIR 
183 
ON SATURDAY 7 DECEMBER 1969, the Brammall family 
were settling in to watch their favourite TV programme, 
High Chaparral.  Just before it was due to start, at around 
8:25 p.m., all power in the district was suddenly cut off.  A violent 
lightning storm was lighting up the sky to the south-east, with 
bright, long-drawn-out flashes following one another in a spectacu- 
lar sequence. 
Ted Brammall went outside to watch the storm and immediately 
saw a brilliant object which he later described as resembling a "large 
flourescent light." Jennifer Brammall came out of the house to join 
him, and they watched it for five minutes.   When the power came 
on again, Ted telephoned to the Power Board, and was informed 
that the entire district had been blacked out, probably as a result 
of a violent electrical storm in the vicinity of Rotorua. 
The object the Brammalls watched was large, and very bright. It 
hung in the air, with a backdrop of dark clouds; stars, showing 
through breaks in the clouds, which Ted glanced at from time to 
time, gave him an idea of its great size. 
After hovering motionless the object moved "slowly and deliber- 
ately," tilting over so that cone-like projections on its bottom sur- 
face, covering a great deal of the area and looking like "oval dark 
areas," could be clearly seen.   To the further astonishment of the 
watchers, the light emanating from the object pulsated to match the 
brilliance of the lightning flashes. Spine-like projections of coloured 
light — blue, green and red — radiated sideways and downwards. 
Apart from this single, slow-motion roll, the object remained sta- 
tionary. Later, in a statement to an investigator (Sam Rix), the 
Brammalls declared that the object gave the impression that it was 
constructed, a machine of some kind. They later made independent 
drawings of what they had seen; their statement and their sketches 
are in my files — along with many other eye-witness reports and 
sketches from different parts of the country. Sightings like this are 
now a very frequent occurrence, but since officially UFOs don't 
exist, 
the 
news 
media 
are 
inclined 
to 
leave 
them 
alone. 
But the Brammalls know they saw something — an object that 
conforms in all respects to typical descriptions of UFOs.   At least

[PAG 203]
184 
they know that they are not alone.   Here's another detailed report 
again accompanied by sketches made soon after the sighting, and 
signed as a truthful record by Y. R. Plant, E. F. Plant, S. Plant, B. 
R. Plant, and M. C. Clapp, all of Auckland.  The sighting took p lace 
at Te Kaha, East Coast. 
At 
about 
9:00 
p.m. 
on 
the 
evening 
of 
22 
January 
1969, 
we noticed a bright flashing light that appeared to be trav- 
elling behind the ridge of the hills opposite.   It became 
stationary, 
and 
brilliant 
flashing 
continued 
as 
it 
appeared 
to revolve. 
At 
the 
same 
time, 
at 
intervals 
of 
approximately 
two 
minutes, 
a 
lightning-like 
flash 
from 
a 
point 
slightly 
fur- 
ther south lit up the sky.   It came from behind a small 
black 
cloud 
above 
the 
mountains, 
and 
the 
flashes 
were 
di- 
rected 
at 
the 
revolving 
light. 
 
 
A 
similar 
occasional 
flash 
was seen much further south. 
There 
were 
five 
of 
us, 
my 
wife 
and 
I, 
my 
two 
teenage 
sons 
and 
their 
friend, 
watching 
this 
phenomenon 
for 
about 
an 
hour, 
when 
we 
realised 
that 
there 
was 
much 
activity 
going on in the sky.   What appeared to be a small star 
would 
suddenly 
fall 
at 
exceptional 
speed, 
and 
then 
hover 
in the sky.    At one time there were about six of these 
falling 
lights, 
one 
of 
which 
disappeared 
towards 
the 
south 
in a hopping motion. 
In 
the 
eastern 
sky 
there 
was 
a 
large 
bright 
light 
with 
rays emanating from it, and below this a small "star" hovered 
up and down.   As we watched, a long, dark cloud formed 
above the mountain range. 
After 
observing 
this 
continual 
activity 
for 
three 
hours, 
two lights were seen to rise from behind the hills.   One 
light 
was 
red 
and 
the 
other 
a 
bluish-green 
rotating 
light, 
and 
they 
gave 
the 
impression 
of 
being 
attached 
to 
one 
object, 
as 
they 
moved 
in 
conjunction 
with 
each 
other. 
This 
remained 
stationary 
for 
thirty 
minutes 
before 
moving 
slowly 
up behind the long cloud. At this time the flashing on the 
ground 
ceased. 
Twenty 
minutes 
later, 
five 
red 
lights, 
evenly 
spaced, 
rose 
above 
the 
mountain 
range, 
hovered 
for 
about 
five 
minutes 
then 
travelled 
back 
and 
forth 
above 
the 
hills. 
This 
was 
still 
occurring 
when 
we 
eventually 
retired, 
four 
and a half hours after first sighting the flashing light.

[PAG 204]
185 
Group observations are obviously of much greater interest to any 
investigator than casual, individual sightings. Stories and data can 
be checked from one observer to the other, and greater faith can be 
placed in such reports when they are found to match in important 
aspects. New Zealand's most fascinating group sighting came in 
December 1968, when a number of primary school pupils at Te 
Muta School, Havelock North — the centre of a region which has 
yielded sighting after sighting in the past four years — reported 
seeing a flying saucer at close range. All six children agreed on the 
object's size and shape — and on having been "scared" by it. They 
reported that they saw both a hatch and an antenna as the saucer- 
shaped object hovered at low altitude over some poplar trees, that 
it made a clicking noise, and that it was about half the size of the 
school's swimming-pool — which they were attending at the time as 
a non-swimming class.  They drew the attention of their teacher to 
the object; suddenly it shot upwards, and travelled off in the direc- 
tion of the nearby town of Hastings, leaving a vapour trail behind. 
A teacher reported that he watched the same object for about ten 
minutes as it moved backward and forward across Hastings. The 
nearby aerodrome and the Civil Aviation Department at Napier 
confirmed that there were no aircraft in the area at the time of the 
sighting. 
Gavin King, aged ten, described it like this for the Hawke's Bay 
Herald-Tribune, which ran the story on 20 December: "It was round, 
with three things on top ... there were lights all round the bottom 
and here was a sort of hatch on the side ...It made a clicking noise, 
like a clock."1 
Graham Hebden, aged ten: "At first the object looked like a bird, 
but it grew to the size of about half the school's swimming-pool as 
it finally hovered over the trees." 
PeterTaylor, aged nine: "It had 'things' hanging from it.   They 
had 'round things' attached to them." 
Gavin King and other pupils later made sketches of what they 
had seen.  Meanwhile, a Havelock North woman said she had seen 
something, evidently the same object, for about five minutes. Mrs. 
M. Berg, of Lipscombe Crescent, said she stood at her door and 
watched the object approach from the south-east.  "It was the noise 
it made that caused me to look up," she said.    'It was a funny 
1 Similar clicking noise was associated with UFOs, as described 
in Harmonic 33.

[PAG 205]
186 
noise — something different."  She watched the object until it was 
straight above her house. 
She said that the bottom of the object was like the bottom of 
boat, and that it had square wings. 
These reports were made just four months after some other odd 
occurrences nearby, at Taradale. 
John Dow, aged 19, apprentice joiner, and his friend Paul Fran- 
klin, were out at the Taradale dump one September evening, look- 
ing for rats to shoot.  It was around 9:30.  Suddenly the two youths 
heard something they were later to describe as "sounding like 
thunder." The ground beneath their feet shook; looking up into the 
sky they saw some thirty moving lights, at intervals disappearing 
from view. They watched the spectacle for about half an hour, and 
finally, mystified and excited, they went home. 
Lights had been seen in the sky over this area many times during 
the past few months: just one year before, verified sightings of  UFOs 
were reported from the nearby Hastings area. At that time I plotted 
these on the grid map of New Zealand and found, not too much to 
my surprise, that the verified positions all fell neatly on parallel 
latitudinal lines of the grid. 
So strange objects in the sky were not too unusual in this area. 
The following night the two boys returned to the dump; it was a 
Saturday, and they planned to keep a vigil. They saw nothing of 
interest and went home slightly deflated. On Sunday night they 
were driving in John Dow's car; Paul, looking back, spotted a bright 
white light, but there was nothing of particular note to record. 
Two nights later they were driving near the Waiohiki golf course 
when they saw a green light in the sky; the colour changed to red, 
and soon they saw a "pencil of light" flash across the sky. 
The following statements were given in evidence at the Napier 
Magistrate's Court, when John Dow, charged with dangerous driv- 
ing, pleaded not guilty.   In court he said: "As we were passing the 
Taradale motor camp, Paul, who was staring out the back, suddenly 
let out a scream that this (the pencil of light) was coming at us. I 
saw it in the mirror.    Paul dived out of his side; his feet kicked 
mine." 
Dow was pitched half out of the car: "I started to get up," he went 
on, "and Franklin said: Tor God's  sake  stay down!    They are 
after us!'" 
Now out of control the car plunged on for about two hundred 
yards along Taradale's Gloucester Street, and finally crashed through

[PAG 206]
187 
the plate glass window of a fruit shop.   It was this sudden end to 
the chase that brought the two youngsters first to hospital, and 
later to the Magistrate's Court in Napier. 
Prosecuting was Sergeant W. T. Pender.   After Dow described 
the light which chased the car as being about two and a half feet 
across, 
Sergeant 
Pender 
asked 
him 
what 
he 
thought 
it 
was. 
"A flying saucer," Dow answered. 
The prosecutor asked whether the coloured lights could have 
originted from an explosion in the dump. No, Dow asserted, they 
had watched the lights in the sky for about half an hour. 
Mr. W. K I. Dougall dismissed the dangerous driving case against 
Dow. However, before sending Dow on his way, the magistrate had 
something to add. 
"Most of these lights people see have a natural cause," he de- 
clared, "and the 'flying saucer in hot pursuit' might have been the 
lights of a car coming around the corner ...The sooner he (Dow) 
talks 
to 
a 
sensible 
adult 
about 
the 
matter, 
the 
better." 
However, two pertinent facts remain: the story given by the two 
youths in explanation for their car crashing through a shop window 
was accepted by the police; the magistrate admitted that Dow had 
got into such a state of mind that he had acted involuntarily when 
"something had distracted him." 
The second point is that the insurance company concerned with 
damages to the car also accepted Dow's story. This at least was 
something new in New Zealand.   A statement I have on file from 
Paul Franklin shows that other people in the district, including at 
least two policemen, had witnessed the lights in the sky over Tara- 
dale. 
There have been countless other sightings, not only of objects in 
the sky — but of evidence showing that strange objects have landed. 
Pouraua South Road stretches for a mile across a gravel surface 
on the Hauraki Plains. It heads into an uninviting scrubland where 
manuka bushes predominate.    Here a fifty-acre block of land is 
owned by a former dairy farmer, Bert O'Neil, who on 4 September 
1969 made a startling discovery. Something, it appeared, had landed 
on his property leaving a bleached circle of manuka about fifty feet 
across, there were three V-shaped grooves of disturbed peat soil in 
the centre of the circle, each about two or three inches deep and 
spaced precisely nine feet apart.   Nowhere had the manuka been 
crushed, leading Mr. O'Neil to theorise that "three legs had been 
slid into the ground and then splayed outward." A reporter for one

[PAG 207]
188 
of Auckland's weekend newspapers wrote: "The manuka, which is 
extremely healthy elsewhere, seems to have been bleached grey- 
white and dry by heat inside the clearly defined circle.  The scrub 
has definitely not been burned." 
The Ngatea circle caused considerable excitement — more than 
any previously reported UFO sighting in New Zealand, in fact, for 
here at least was something tangible. Hordes of people came by car 
for days after, trampling about the area in search of heaven 
knows what. 
As usual, official investigators were among the late arrivals, and 
before long the explanations were coming at rapid-fire pace. The 
area had been hit by a "blight," thus the grey-white manuka; the 
marks in the ground had been made by pigs, rooting for feed; and 
so on. A fungus was found to be growing on the manuka, and this 
was acclaimed as the cause of the condition of the scrub — although 
no one was able to state why only a near-perfect circle had been 
attacked. Then it was found by scientific examination of the manuka, 
that the branches and trunks were dry of sap and had been "cooked" 
from the inside out — rather as if they had been exposed to extreme 
radiation. 
A TV garden-show host, Reg Chibnall, made independent tests 
on the soils from inside the circle and from outside; he found that 
seed grew normally in the latter soils, but produced miserable, dis- 
eased-looking plants in pots containing soil from inside the circle. 
The then Minister of Science favoured the fungus-and-pigs version 
and dismissed the whole affair.  Meanwhile, scientists at Auckland 
University concluded that dead spiders in the bleached manuka 
area had been killed from radiation.   Mr Don Lockwood, of Waihi, 
made another interesting discovery: twenty-two feet out from the 
centre-line position of the ground marks, the manuka showed signs 
of where the radiation had ended and the rest of the tree had died. 
This point of demarcation was just above ground level, but increased 
in height up the trees the further to the south the checks were 
made. 
Tree and other samples were collected by Mr. H.L. Cooke, of 
Tauranga, and these were examined by a horticulturist in the same 
city. Mr. Stuart-Menzies, who gave the following report: "The scrub 
is radioactive and has been cooked instantaneously from the inside 
outward. I know of no earthly source of energy which could produce 
this effect.   The manuka was bleached dry but showed no visible 
signs of burning.   Every ounce of moisture in the plant had been

[PAG 208]
189 
instataneously vaporized, and it was bone-dry and brittle. This is 
most unusual in manuka, which normally takes a long time to dry 
out. Some kind of high-frequency radiation cooked the material 
from the inside outward.   The energy received reduced the pith to 
black carbon, without the outside showing any sign of burning. The 
cells in the medullary rays were burnt by the sudden vaporisation 
of cell sap.   A meteorite or lightning could not do this, and it was 
too sudden for combustion." 
Mr. Stuart-Menzies added that the process appeared to have been 
similar to that employed in infra-red-cooking, "but on an enormous 
scale." 
So the Ngatea circle remains a mystery. Mr. O'Neil wishes he 
had never found the area where something out of this world 
landed — he is tired of the neighbourly ribbing he has been exposed 
to ever since. 
It is well known to me that radar operators at various airfields 
throughout New Zealand are constantly picking up unidentified objects 
in the sky on their screens. Official reports are filed, but these men 
seldom speak of what they have seen — more than ridicule, they 
fear losing their jobs; such is the official wall of silence. On numer- 
ous occasions airfield authorities have become so excited over radar 
blips of unknown flying objects that incoming aircraft have been 
diverted in order to allow control to have a close look at the 
intruders. 
Other airfield workers frequently see objects in the sky that are 
certainly not aircraft — or birds, or marsh gas, or Venus in descent. 
In front, of me now are two independent reports made by workers 
at Auckland International Airport concerning something that at- 
tracted their attention on 3 December 1967.   To protect the two 
workers concerned, I shall not give their names; their signed re- 
ports are   in  my  possession,   and   are   available   to   bona  fide 
investigators: 
"While working at the airport, I saw two silvery-to-pale lemon 
lights cross the sky from south-south-west to a north-north-east 
direction. They were convex on both sides and on the upper side 
was a small dome. They flew together for a short time until the 
lower one began to make sharp alterations in its altitude, zig-zag- 
ging up and down. They were in sight for about four to seven 
seconds...They finally disappeared from sight in a bank of clouds to 
the 
north." 
The second report is confirmatory:

[PAG 209]
"Two saucer-shaped objects, silver in colour, traversed the sky 
from SSW to NNE.   They flew in formation for a little while; the 
lower saucer then moved jerkily about the other saucer until they 
both disappeared behind a big bank of clouds on the horizon to they 
north.  Both objects travelled at an extremely high speed, in excess 
of a thousand miles an hour."   Both reports include drawing of 
saucer shaped craft featuring a prominent dome. 
So much for a mere sampling of sightings and more dramatic 
events close to home; in every other country of the world there have 
been reports of a similar nature — strange objects in the air, on the 
ground, in the sea; the sudden appearance of alien beings; the dis- 
covery of peculiar artifacts, constructions. 
One of the most irritating kinds of report is the incompleted 
account. South American newspapers abound with half stories about 
UFOs — sudden appearances of saucers, their disappearance in the 
jungle, the setting forth of posses to track them down; and then -  
silence. 
In October 1968, a group of climbers searched the Andes for a 
flying saucer base; they reported that they had found, but as a by- 
product so to speak, a "fortress" of a previously unknown civilisa- 
tion. This was in a region of Chile known as Talca, 150 miles south 
of Santiago. There had been repeated accounts of UFOs in the area, 
cars stopping and starting without explanation, out-of-season flow- 
ers blooming.   The "fortress" comprised two platforms, each about 
seven hundred square yards, and made from 233 blocks of volcanic 
rock, each block with an average weight of ten tons. 
February, the following year: on the assumption that the Andes 
platform might in fact have been a kind of launching area for UFOs 
("cosmodrome" was the word seized upon by the wire services), an 
expedition led by Humberto Sarnataro Bounaud, a thirty-two-year- 
old businessman and painter, prepared to explore the giant blocks, 
as well as a cave said to be located beneath the platform. Many 
peasants and villagers in the area claimed they had seen flying 
saucers apparently taking off and landing in the mountain nea