=== The energy grid - Harmonic 695. The pulse of the universe (Bruce L. Cathie).pdf — CHUNK 5/12 ===
Chars: 45,000 | Offset: 177,502



[PAG 97]
I said in my first work that "the force fields of the grid were 
naturally distorted when this happened and stresses were set up in 
various parts of the system. As the earth moved through space, 
various points in these areas of strain have lined up geometrically 
in relation to the solar system as a whole; the MC2 section of the 
grid formula has possibly been fulfilled and a resulting explosion 
has taken place, with the known devastating results." 
79

[PAG 98]
8>  THE EARTHS MAGNETIC FIELD 
THE 
FIRST 
BOOK 
THAT 
I 
EVER 
READ 
ON 
THE 
subject 
of 
unidentified 
flying 
objects 
was 
called 
Behind 
The 
Flying 
Saucers 
by 
Frank 
Scully, 
an 
American 
reporter. 
This 
was in the early 1950s and the factual information contained in it 
impressed me very much. Some years ago, I lent my prized copy to 
someone and never received it back—the fate of many books in the 
early years of my research. Last week I was lucky enough to obtain 
a small paper back copy from a very good friend in the United 
States and on second reading I came across some information which 
makes sense now that I have had a number of years of research 
with which to correlate the data. 
According to Scully, a group of American scientists carried out a 
crash programme during the second world war years to study 
magnetism and all the allied branches of science. Most of the 
knowledge gained has never been made public, and it appears that 
this comparatively small group is now so far advanced in the field 
of electro-magnetism that they could well apply the knowledge in 
the construction of antigravity-type vehicles. Scully also states that 
the destructive forces of electro-magnetism have been mastered in 
the field of weaponry. 
It was his comments on the magnetic fields of the earth that 
interested me most. Evidently a device call a magnetron was in 
vented by a physicist by the name of Albert Wallace Hull, who was 
born in April 1880. This invention was brought to the fore in 1928 
when it was discovered that magnetrons with split anodes can generate 
very high frequencies. 
Quoting Scully. 
Since 
then 
the 
magnetron 
has 
had 
many 
important 
applications. 
It 
depends 
on 
the 
fact 
that 
electrons 
can 
be 
ordered 
in 
their 
path 
by 
a 
magnet. 
In 
ordinary 
electron 
tubes the flow of electrons from the filaments to the plate 
is 
regulated 
by 
the 
charge 
on 
the 
grid. 
In 
the 
magnetron 
there is no grid, but the tube is in a magnetic field. As the 
intensity of the field increases there comes a stage at which 
the electrons are curled back into the filament, and never 
80

[PAG 99]
81 
reach 
the 
plate. 
At 
this 
critical 
point 
a 
slight 
change 
in 
the field produces a large change in the current carried by 
the tube. 
The 
magnetron 
is 
especially 
valuable 
for 
producing 
high 
frequency 
oscillations 
used 
for 
generating 
ultra-short 
waves. 
The 
magnetron 
is 
a 
diode 
or 
thermionic 
tube 
having 
a 
strange 
axial 
cathode 
surrounded 
by 
a 
cylindrical 
anode. 
Its 
use 
as 
a 
magnetic 
prospecting 
instrument 
derives 
from 
the fact that in the presence of a magnetic field the elec- 
trons do not travel regularly from the cathode to the anode; 
instead 
they 
spiral 
around 
the 
cathode 
in 
circular 
paths, 
and 
after 
a 
critical 
magnetic 
field 
intensity 
is 
reached, 
the 
electrons 
will 
return 
to 
the 
cathode 
without 
reaching 
the 
anode. 
At 
this 
field 
strength 
the 
plate 
current 
will 
drop 
abruptly. 
The 
procedure 
in 
operating 
the 
instrument 
consists 
in decreasing the plate voltage on the diode until the voltage 
is reached at which the current falls off rapidly. The plate 
voltage 
at 
which 
this 
occurs 
is 
related 
to 
the 
critical 
field 
strength H by the relation H - 6/7200 V/R, where "R" is the 
radius of the anode. 
This equation is interesting when related to my own research 
because the value of 6/7200 is equal to .000833333.   The square of 
this number is .000000694444, or the harmonic of the reciprocal of 
the speed of light.) 
In 
practice 
a 
compensation 
procedure 
is 
used 
wherein 
the 
field 
to 
be 
measured 
is 
nullified 
by 
a 
known 
field 
produced 
by 
a 
coil 
arrangement. 
The 
magnetron 
is 
af- 
fected by the component of the earth's field which is parallel 
to 
its 
axis. 
The 
instrument 
theoretically 
may 
be 
used 
to 
measure 
any 
components 
of 
the 
earth's 
field 
by 
suitable 
orientation. 
The 
sensitivity 
of 
the 
tube 
may 
be 
increased 
through 
regeneration 
by 
passing 
the 
plate 
current 
through 
an 
additional 
solenoid. 
Interesting 
experimental 
results 
have 
linen 
obtained 
by 
using 
magnetic 
alloy 
field 
pieces 
to 
in- 
crease the affected magnetic field. 
The 
earth 
being 
simply 
a 
huge 
magnet, 
a 
dynamo, 
wound 
with magnetic lines of force as its coils, tenescopically counted 
to be 1257 TO THE SQUARE CENTIMETRE IN ONE

[PAG 100]
82 
DIRECTION 
AND 
1850 
TO 
THE 
SQUARE 
CENTIMETRE 
IN 
THE 
OTHER 
DIRECTION 
(EDDY 
CURRENTS), 
indi- 
cates 
that 
natural 
law 
has 
placed 
these 
lines 
as 
close 
to- 
gether 
as 
the 
hairs 
on 
one's 
head. 
And 
yet 
they 
never 
touch or cross each other if let alone. If done so, by acci- 
dent, 
the 
catastrophe 
would 
spread 
like 
a 
searchlight 
and 
destroy everything in its path. 
(I agree with this statement up to a point, as I believe that 
matter is actually produced by the crossing of these lines of force.) 
An original error of say a foot, at its source would burn 
everything in its path up to 20 miles and a mile and a half 
wide in ten thousandths of a second. If left to encircle the 
world 
the 
original 
flash 
would 
have 
banded 
the 
globe 
ten 
times 
in 
one 
second. 
FORTUNATELY 
AS 
A 
WEAPON 
OF 
DEFENCE 
THIS 
DESTRUCTIVE 
FORCE 
HAS 
BEEN 
MASTERED. 
The 
spectroscope 
shows 
that 
there 
is 
an 
enormous 
magnetic 
field 
around 
the 
sun, 
and 
it 
is 
the 
present 
con- 
clusion of the best minds that magnetic lines of force from 
the 
sun 
envelop 
this 
earth 
and 
extend 
to 
the 
moon, 
and 
THAT 
EVERYTHING, 
NO 
MATTER 
WHAT 
ITS 
FORM 
ON 
THIS 
PLANET, 
EXISTS 
BY 
REASON 
OF 
MAGNETIC 
LINES OF FORCE. 
This I agree with, according to my own research. We are taught 
in our schools and universities that the magnetic field passes through 
one magnetic pole, then through the body, and out the other mag- 
netic pole.    I disagree with this explanation.    I believe that the 
magnetic lines of force enter the body at the poles, then carry out 
a looped path through the body before passing out the opposite 
poles.   As pointed out by Scully, the lines of force move in both 
directions. The flow is not in one pole and out the other, but in both 
poles, and out both poles, although the field intensity both ways is 
unbalanced. 
If we can visualise one line of force so that we can trace out its 
path we can form an analogy by imagining it to be similar to a piece 
of string. First of all we make a loop in the piece of string. Now 
imagine it being fed through a fixed position with the loop remain- 
ing stationary relative to a fixed point. With the length of string as

[PAG 101]
83 
the axis we can now make the loop revolve in a path which is at 90° 
to the movement of the string.   The loop in fact would trace out a 
spherical-shaped form in space. 
The lines of force of the magnetic field would form a lattice or 
grid pattern, due to the spin of the planetary body. A good analogy 
would be an ordinary machine-wound ball of string.   The length of 
string has taken on the form of a ball, and at the same time has 
formed a crisscross pattern. If we again visualise this as a physical 
body being formed in space then we can now imagine a small vortex 
being created at all the trillions of points where the lines of force 
cross each other in the lattice pattern.   Each vortex would manifest 
as an atomic structure and create within itself what we term a 
gravitational field. The gravitational field in other words is nothing 
more than the effect of relative motion in space.   Matter is drawn 
towards a gravitational field, just as a piece of wood floating on 
water is drawn towards a whirlpool.   The gravitational fields cre- 
ated by the vortexual action of every atom would combine to form 
the field of the completed planetary body. 
The world grid that I speak of is the natural grid that is formed 
by the lattice pattern of the interlocking lines of force. 
The density of the earth's magnetic field is the most important 
piece of information in Scully's book. The unbalanced field of 1257 
lines of force per square centimetre in one direction and 1850 in the 
other does not tell us very much in itself. But we use the informa- 
tion to calculate the field strength over an area which has a har- 
harmonic relationship with the unified fields of space, and if the basic 
information is correct, we should find some mathematical values of 
great importance. 
 At the time of my earlier publications I was not aware of the 
extreme importance of the values at that stage of accuracy.   I was 
close enough to see how they fitted into the equations, but a further 
fine tuning was necessary to reveal the knowledge locked within 
these two simple numbers. 
The basic unit for harmonic calculation is the geodetic inch, or 
one seventy-two thousandth of a minute of arc; one minute of arc 
being 6000 geodetic feet. If we take the values 1257 and 1850 
lines of force   per   square   centimetre   and   calculate   the   field 
strengths for one square geodetic inch, the field density is 8326.71764 
and 12255.08864 lines of force respectively.    The fields being in 
opposition to each other.    The combined field density is equal 
to 20581.80628.

[PAG 102]
84 
Allowing for very slight variations in the conversion factors the 
difference in field strengths (12255.08864 minus 8326.71764) is equal 
to 3928.371. We could say that the resultant field density one way 
is equivalent to field "A" minus field "B," or 3928.371 lines of force. 
This value I found to be the harmonic reciprocal of the grid coordinate 
2545.584412. 
The combined field strength of 20581.80628 lines of force can be 
associated with the communication harmonic 169444 as follows. 
Allowing for the matter-anti-matter cycle, we double the value: 
(20581.80628 X 2) equals 41163.612 
41163.612 squared equals 169444 harmonic. 
The harmonic 41163612 also has a direct relationship with the 
geometric construction of the Great Pyramid in Egypt. The Kings 
Chamber in particular is built according to this value. It appears 
that the chamber could act in some way as a cavity resonator 
Perhaps for communication?   This is discussed in later works.

[PAG 103]
9>   PYTHAGORAS AND THE GRID 
85 
AFTER PUBLISHING MY DISCOVERY OF THE WORLD 
grid 
system 
I 
soon 
came 
up 
against 
opposition 
from 
the 
academic 
world 
of 
the 
universities. 
Much 
derisive 
comment 
was made at various meetings, and the main objection appeared to 
be that I had used angular measurement of degrees and minutes of 
arc upon which to base my values of universal measurement. It was 
also argued that a harmonic value to base 10 was not valid as a 
universal multiple, as any other number, such as 12, could be employed 
just 
as 
effectively 
if 
my 
theories 
were 
correct. 
At the time I could only counter these attacks on my work by 
pointing out the fact that I had endeavoured to make use of other 
values in my calculations for this very reason.  I had found through 
trial and error that only angular measure in degrees and minutes 
of arc, in multiples to base 10, could be utilised to set up a system 
of universal harmonics.    I found that this method was the only 
possible way to measure the harmonic relationship between light 
and matter regardless of the size of the body in question, be it an 
atom or a mass the size of Jupiter. 
I also suggested that the critics should set up a system such as 
mine by using other basic values and harmonic equivalents if they 
were so sure of their ground, and to my knowledge this has never 
been accomplished with any success. The academics maintained 
that the division of a circle into degrees and minutes of arc was a 
random decision made by mathematicians in historical times and 
was therefore a purely arbitrary method of measure. The division, 
according to them, could just as well have been into any number of 
equal parts, depending on the whim of the mathematical body which 
set the standard.    This naturally would make all my work com- 
letely valueless. 
I continued to maintain that the division of the circle must have 
been made due to considerations of a geometric nature, coupled with 
that of natural law. All the work I had done to date indicated to me 
that the mathematicians of old had a knowledge of the universe 
which 
we 
are 
only 
once 
again 
beginning 
to 
understand. 
The final solution to this argument could be overcome only by 
the discovery of a geometric connection between the harmonics of

[PAG 104]
86 
light and the harmonics inherent in the division of a circle. As 
I had based my light values on minute of arc measure there must 
be some type of geometric arrangement which would tie them 
together. 
This was always in the back of my mind during the reading of 
many research books and finally I came across something which 
believe will answer the critics.   The friend who came to my rescue 
was none other than Pythagoras himself, a man of great stature and 
forceful personality who lived in the sixth century BC. He traveled 
extensively to enlarge his mathematical knowledge and was said to 
have gained much information from the priests of Zoroaster, who 
had in their possession the mathematical lore of the Mesopotami- 
ans.  He founded a semi-religious, or mystical, cult based on mathe- 
matics, round about 540 BC in the township of Crotona, in southern 
Italy.   He taught his disciples to worship numbers, the main idea 
being that number is the essence of all things, and is the metaphysi- 
cal principle of rational order in the universe. 
He discovered the mathematical relationships of the musical scale 
and the connection of musical harmony and whole numbers. He 
firmly believed that all harmony and things of nature can be ex- 
pressed in whole-number relationships. Even the planets in theit 
orbits, according to him, moved in harmonious relationship, one to 
the other, producing the so-called "music of the spheres". 
The Pythagoreans explained the elements as built up of geo- 
metrical figures. One of the most interesting of these was the 
dodecahedron. 
That 
particular 
figure 
has 
locked 
within 
it 
a 
great deal of information on the geometrical nature of the universe. 
My first introduction to Pythagoras however was in the discovery 
that the humble right-angled triangle, with sides to the ratio of 
3, 4 and 5, was the key to the relationship of the speed of light 
to the circle. 
The clue to this was found on page 62 in John Mitchell's book 
The City of Revelation. He was discussing sacred numbers and 
referring to the problem of squaring the circle. The suggestion was 
that the relative dimensions of the earth and the moon indicated as 
answer and that the same source provided the sacred numbers of 
the canon. 
He demonstrated that if the circles of the earth and the moon and 
placed tangentially to each other and produced in their correct 
proportions, then each framed within a square, the geometric figure 
thus produced  successfully  squares the circle.     With an earth

[PAG 105]
87 
diameter of 7920 miles and that of the moon 2160 miles, the perime- 
ters of the two squares are respectively 31680 miles and 8640 miles. 
The radii of the earth (3690) and the moon (1080) in combination 
amount to 5040 miles. This, according to Plato, is a mystical number. 
it turns out that the circumference of a circle struck from the centre 
of the earth and passing through the centre of the moon would very 
closely measure 31,680 miles which is also equivalent to the perime- 
ter of the square containing the earth. 
Mitchell then went on to state that if the outer corner of the 
square containing the moon is joined to the corresponding corner of 
the square containing the earth, the triangle thus formed has sides 
of 2160, 2880, and 3600 miles.  If divided by their highest common 
factor, 720, these numbers become 3, 4 and 5.  He follows on to say 
that "confronted with facts such as these, it is scarcely possible to 
avoid the conclusion, orthodox in every age but the present, that the 
cosmic canon, inherent in the solar system as in every other depart- 
ment of nature, was revealed to men not invented by them." 
It was obvious to me that from these facts another extremely 
interesting conclusion could be arrived at.   The various geometric 
relationships of the 3, 4, 5 triangle are many and varied, as can be 
seen by a glance through any standard geometry book.   But the 
most important of all cannot be found in any ordinary publication. 
As demonstrated in other sections of my work, the pure harmonic 
of the speed of light is 144.   If we divide this by two, to find the 
harmonic of one half-cycle, or half-wave, the answer is 72.   If we 
now apply this to the Pythagoras right-angled 3,4,5 triangle and 
extend each side in this ratio, then the figure will now have sides 
of 216, 288, and 360 units. 
The harmonic proportions thus derived are equal to: 
216 = 21600 = minutes of arc in a circle 
360 = 360 = degrees in a circle 
288 = 144 X 2 = 2C, where C = speed of light. 
It pears from this that the harmonic of light has a very definite 
relationship with the geometry of a circle, and that the early mathe- 
maticians were fully aware of the fact. 
If a triangle in this proportion is laid out in minutes of arc upon 
the surface of a sphere, then the combined angles formed by the 
corners of the triangle and the centre of the sphere are:

[PAG 106]
216 
360 } minutes 
288 
864   minutes = 14.4 degrees 
This again creates a harmonic in sympathetic resonance with the 
light factor of 144. 
Can the critics still deny that the geometry of matter is directly 
related to the harmonic interweaving of light itself? There is no 
substance, in the absolute sense. We live in a reality of un-reality 
all is an illusion and the stuff that dreams are made of. Our physi- 
cal world is nothing more than a resonating ball of light and shade. 
88

[PAG 107]
10>   THE MAPS OF THE ANCIENTS 
89 
WHO  WERE  THE  ANCIENTS  WHO  MAPPED  THE 
coastline of Antarctica, long buried under massive layers 
of ice and hidden from the eyes of modern man? It is only 
recent years that our scientists have probed beneath the ice with 
electronic instruments, and found the contour of the coastline deep 
down below the surface.  It has been said that either the cartogra- 
phers of old had the same scientific means of doing the job as we 
have, or that the coast was then free of ice and the contours mapped 
from a high altitude. This would mean that our ancestors had some 
means of air travel. We shall not venture too far into that, though 
much has been written on the subject. The maps themselves are of 
the greatest interest to us, from a scientific and mathematical point 
of view. 
Charles H. Hapgood, a professor at Keene State College of the 
University of New Hampshire, in the United States, has provided a 
complete scientific analysis of one of these maps which indicates a 
very advanced level of mathematics as the basis for construction. 
The chart used for the project was a copy of an old parchment 
now known as the Piri Re'is map. It was discovered in 1929 in the 
Imperial Palace in Constantinople and, according to the date in- 
scribed, was produced in 1513. The signature found on it was that 
Piri Ibn Hati Mammed, known as Piri Re'is, at that time an 
Admiral in the Turkish navy. 
What caused a special interest in this map was the fact that it 
showed South America and Africa in their correct relative longi- 
tudes. As there was no means of calculating longitude in the 16th 
century, 
this 
caused 
much 
puzzlement 
amongst 
the 
scientists. 
in 1956, attention was again centered on the map when a copy 
was  presented to the United States Navy Hydrographic office by a 
Turkish naval officer. A member of the staff referred the map to a 
friend, Captain Arlington H. Mallery, who had made a study of the 
ancient Viking maps of North America and Greenland. It was Mallery 
who suggested that the original map was made before the coast of 
Antarctica was covered in ice. He said it was his opinion that the 
southern part of the map traced out the inlets and islands of the 
Antarctic coast which are now buried under millions of tons of ice.

[PAG 108]
90 
Many other scientists conceded that Mallery may be right, and 
subsequently Charles Hapgood decided to investigate the map in a 
thoroughly scientific way at Keene State College. He was helped to 
a great extent in the venture by a number of his students. 
Their first step was to acquaint themselves with as much infor- 
mation as possible in regard to mediaeval maps. They concentrated 
mainly on the old sea charts or "Portolan" maps which guided the 
sailors of old from port to port. 
It was found that the old charts appeared to have been copied 
from a more ancient master-map. What pointed to this was the fact 
that no major change had been made in the maps for over 200 
years, dating from the 14th century. The original map had been so 
accurately constructed that no one in that period had the knowledge 
to improve on it. Mr. Hapgood states in his book that "the evidence 
pointed to their origin in a culture with a higher level of technology 
than was attained in mediaeval or ancient times." 
It was a difficult task to determine the method of construction of 
the chart, but it was finally decided that the only possible way 
would have been to work from some central point.   From this the 
mapmaker would select a radius of sufficient length to cover the 
area he wished to reproduce and then draw a circle.   This circle 
would then be divided up into 16 equal triangular segments, each 
of which subtended an angle of 22 1/2 degrees at the centre.  If the 
points of intersection of the various radii and the periphery of the 
circle were then joined, four different squares could be drawn to 
form the basis of a grid.   By choosing one of the squares and draw- 
ing a series of lines parallel to the sides of the square and at right 
angles to each other, the map lattice would be completed.    The 
details of the map could then be plotted in. 
If the grid line which passed through the centre of the circle was 
orientated towards the north, then the map lattice would be much 
the same as that used in modern-day construction. 
The difficult part was to find out where the centre for the Piri 
Re'is chart had been placed, as only a small fragment of the map 
remained. It could be seen that its centre would have been in a 
position a long way to the east. 
A number of different projections were calculated over a period 
of three years, and each time it was found that errors in either 
latitude or longitude resulted. By gradually lengthening and short 
ening the radius and shifting the central point, it was eventually 
discovered that the most probable position for the centre was at 23.5

[PAG 109]
91 
  degrees north, 30.0 degrees east. The radius which was finally 
calculated to give the best results proved to be 69.5 degrees long. 
Here again we have a very strong indication that our ancestors 
had an extensive knowledge of science and mathematics. The value 
of 69.5 degrees for the radius is very close to the natural earth 
harmonic geometric of 6944 (see Chapter 12) and the reciprocal of 
the pure harmonic of light. The mapmakers of that time apparently 
used a method of map projection which was based on universal 
mathematical constants, which afforded them great accuracy in plotting 
the surface features of the earth. 
DIAGRAM 7 
The diagram shows the most probable position for the centre 
of the map projection

[PAG 110]
1 1 >   RUSSIANS AND GERMANS DISCOVER 
A WORLD GRID SYSTEM 
PYTHAGORAS 
TAUGHT 
THAT 
ALL 
THE 
ELEMENTS 
contained 
in 
the 
physical 
universe 
were 
built 
up 
from 
geo- 
metrical 
figures. 
The 
most 
interesting 
of 
these 
was 
the 
pentadodecahedron, which was identified as the "sphere of the uni- 
verse", or the "hull of the sphere". The construction of the world 
was likened to the building of a ship, by the use of geometrical 
shapes. Plato also referred to this in the Phaedo where we see a 
statement that the "true earth", if looked at from above, is "many 
coloured like the balls that are made of many pieces of leather". 
Out of the regular solids, the dodecahedron is the one that most 
closely approaches that of a sphere. It is a solid that is bounded by 
twelve surfaces, and in the case of the pentagon-dodecahedron, twelve 
regular pentagons. If a ball were made up of twelve pieces of 
leather, the pieces would be in the shape of a regular pentagon. If 
the pieces were not flexible, but rigid, the geometric body would be 
a dodecahedron instead of a sphere. The ancient philosophers regarded 
this geometric figure as the building-block of the universe, and the 
knowledge was so secret that anyone revealing it was immediately 
put to death. It is possible for this reason that the schools of mys- 
ticism adopted the pentagram, or pantalpha, as their symbol. There 
was considered to be much magic power in the five-sided figure and 
the Pythagoreans regarded it as the symbol of health. 
Is the earth some sort of gigantic crystal with a rigid skeletal-like 
structure beneath the surface? The Russians ran a story to this 
effect in 1973 in the Komsomolskaya Pravda, the official newspaper 
for the younger generation of the Soviet Union. 
The globe was not just the simple spheroid that we imagined 
The suggestion was that it first started out as a large crystal with 
angular dimensions and that after millions of years wearing-down 
processes, the crystal finally rounded itself into a ball. According to 
Soviet scientists, the angular edges of the primary crystal now lie 
beneath the surface of the earth. In some areas, the edges of the 
crystal protrude imperceptibly through the surface, giving us a slight 
clue to the overall pattern beneath. 
92

[PAG 111]
93 
Knowing nothing oi these theories, a Russian historian by the 
name of Nikolai Goncharov had a hunch that there might be a 
pattern to all the centres of earliest human culture and accordingly 
began to mark them out on a globe. Later, collaboration with a 
construction engineer, Vyacheslav Morozov, and an electronics spe- 
cialist, Valery Makarov, led to a complete hypothesis concerning the 
geometric nature of the earth. After working together for several 
years they published an article in the science journal Chemistry and 
Life issued by the USSR Academy of Sciences. The article was 
headed "Is The Earth A Large Crystal?" 
The article was based on studies covering widely separated fields 
such as archaeology, geochemistry, ornithology and meteorology. 
They theorised that the earth projects from within itself a dual 
geometrically regularised grid. The initial form of the grid being 
twelve pentagonal slabs over the surface of the sphere gave evi- 
dence to the fact that the first shape of the earth was a dodecahe- 
dron. The second part of the grid is formed by twenty equilateral 
triangles making up an icosahedron. They maintain that by super- 
posing the two grids over the surface of the earth a pattern of the 
earth's energy structure can be perceived. 
A careful study of the Russian system showed that the lines 
tracing out their dual grid on the earth's surface coincided with 
zones of active risings and depressions on the ocean floors, core 
faults and mid-oceanic ridges. One of the vertices of the triangles 
falls just east of Florida, near the centre of the infamous "Devil's 
Bermuda Triangle", known worldwide as an area of mysterious 
disappearances of numerous ships and aircraft. It is now known 
that there are twelve of these areas. 
It was also noted that at various positions on the edges of the 
polygons, scientists have discovered regions of seismic and volcanic 
activity. Magnetic anomalies are likewise found at the vertices of 
the polygons. The nodes of the grid are centres of great changes in 
atmospheric pressure and hurricanes form in these areas, veering 
off to follow the paths of intersection formed by the interlocking 
patterns.    Prevailing winds and ocean currents also fit into the 
network. 
An extremely interesting point of the system is in the African 
Republic of Gabon. According to the scientists, a "natural atomic 
reactor" was recently discovered there, which was active 1.7 billion 
years ago. This caused a mass of uranium 235 to reach a level of 
chain reaction.   Oddly enough, this piece of evidence backs up the

[PAG 112]
94 
information published in my first two books regarding the geometric 
nature of atomic reactions.    Certain modern-day atomic stations 
must be constructed on geometric locations in order to function ef- 
ficiently-breeder stations in particular.   An atomic bomb is a geo- 
metric   device   which   necessitates   geometric   positioning   for 
detonation. 
Large mother lodes of mineral ore and vast oil deposits can be 
found where lines of the system cross each other. A whole new 
science is beginning to unfold from research into the geometric makeup 
of the world beneath our feet. 
Satellite photographs have been correlated with the grid. The 
Ural Fold extends along one of the lines and a gigantic fault from 
Morocco to Pakistan coincides with one of the ribs.   Large circular 
geological structures show up on intersections in Morocco, Califor- 
nia and Florida.   Even soil is apparently affected according to its 
locations on the grid: at different intersections the very elements 
making up the soil are mixed in different proportions. 
Man himself, the authors say, has not escaped the influences of 
the energy emitted by the grid lattice. Many of the ancient cultures 
seem to have flourished on intersections of the system.   The mind 
of man is evidently tapped into the very circuitry of the ball of 
energy that constitutes the world that provides his home. 
Most startling of all is the revelation in their article that to line 
the system up on the surface of the globe so that all these different 
factors could be correlated, the point they located as position one 
was that of the Great Pyramid of Giza, in Egypt.  The "measure of 
light" is the key. 
It is obvious from these reports that the Russians are working 
along the same lines as I have been. I too had found similar 
manifestations in geometric locations round the world, by the study 
of two interlocking grid patterns. The Russian grid was shaped 
differently to mine but the same facts were becoming evident from 
the related research efforts. This hinted at the probability that the 
same mathematical concepts could be applied to either system. 
The Russians are certainly on to something and a much more 
extensive in-depth study will have to be made of the network they 
have uncovered in order to "wrinkle out" all the secrets inherent 
within it. Suffice it to say that enough is known at this stage to 
guarantee a goldmine of scientific truths. 
The Germans are not to be left out in the exploration of the 
energy fields within the earth.   They are known to be far-reaching

[PAG 113]
95 
the realms of science and not afraid to explore, or put into prac- 
tice, concepts which to most other western scientists appear fantas- 
tic. The "buzz bombs", V2 rockets and jet aircraft developed during 
World War Two are direct proof of this. 
A book written by Siegfried Wittman was published in Innsbruck, 
Austria, in 1952. It was titled Die Welt Der Geheimen Machte, or 
The World Of The Secret Forces. 
An unusual number of people were involved in the research that 
went into the subject-matter of the book. The group formed a very 
impressive mixture of professional minds to be focussed upon one 
project: Dr. Willi Schlosser; Prof. Hellmut Wolff;Hans-Wilhelm Smollk; 
Heinrich Reblitz; Theodor Weiman; Herbert A Lohlein; Ferdinand 
Reich; Univ. Prof. Dr. Hubert J. Urban; Dir. Prof. Dr. K Sailer; 
Prof. Dr. George Anschutz; Prof. Dr. Theol; and Adolf Koberle. 
After extensive research they came to the conclusion that the 
earth has upon its surface a grid system, in a checkerboard pattern 
consisting of positive and negative poles. 
The squared pattern, according to them, has a centre pole sur- 
ounded by eight smaller poles within each section. The squares 
vary in size from the equator, getting smaller in the direction of the 
earth's 
poles. 
The 
main 
pole 
concentrates 
energy. 
Experiments 
conducted at north latitude 48° indicated that the centre pole has a 
diameter of 2.45 metres. The eight smaller poles have a diameter 
of 60 cm.   Four of the eight outer poles send energy up toward the 
sky alternate pulses. The other four send energy outward hori- 
zontally to the north, south, east and west. 
The squares at 48° north latitude are 15.9 metres diagonally from 
centre to centre poles.   A border field is mingled together in the 
north-west and south-east directions, and in the south-west and 
north-east directions.   These four corners of the squares seem to 
connect the fields of two of the negative smaller poles, and two of 
the positive smaller poles. The side length measurements at the 
equator are 32 metres long. The main centre pole of each positive 
square shows a direction of energy from above to below the earth's 
surface. The created pulse forms a vortex. The negative poles work 
in 
the 
opposite 
sense. 
Not much more is known to me of the German research effort at 
this stage as I have only sighted extracts from the book. One thing 
does stand out however from the scanty bits of information that I do 
have: the Germans carried out many of their experiments on lati- 
tude 48 degrees. What made them select this particular latitude in

[PAG 114]
DIAGRAM 8 
North Pole 
 
96 
South Pole World grid system discovered by the Russians 
preference to any other? Could it be that 48 degrees happens to be 
2880 minutes of arc? Have they also discovered that the harmonic 
of twice the speed of light is 288? The unified equation derived from 
this harmonic cannot be a particularly well-kept secret. This band 
of learned men appears to be aware of a grid complex similar to the 
one I described in my earlier writings. I would be most interested 
to be advised of their complete findings-particularly if they are now 
in possession of the knowledge to make use of the energy being 
radiated by the system. 
I have a feeling that there are many people, or small groups of 
people, in the world that know the secrets of tapping free energy 
from the earth grid and that the knowledge has always been avail 
able to the select few. As far back as 1919, at least one man dem- 
onstrated that he could run electric motors and lighting system 
without having to pay the power companies one cent for the power 
he used. 
A young nineteen-year-old inventive genius by the name of Alfred 
Hubbard startled his contemporaries by powering an eighteen-foot

[PAG 115]
97 
boat around Portage Bay, not far from Seattle, by use of a free 
energy device. 
The boat was driven by a 35hp motor without the aid of batteries. 
The electrical energy was supplied from a transducer within the 
boat. This device was in exact electrical resonance with his free 
energy transformer, which had been constructed on a small area of 
hand. The transformer was supplied by energy collected from an 
array of ground aerials. Wires were run underground north, south, 
east and west for a distance of 1200 feet.  At the outer end of each 
wire was attached a hollow tube, 18 inches   long, filled with mer- 
cury. From other information I have, I would assume that the 
tubes were made from pure iron.   The reason for the iron-mercury 
combination will be discussed in another section.)   The mercury- 
filled tube combination apparently created an electrical one-way 
gate system which directed the energy flow to the central primary 
coil. 
The information I have states that Hubbard made use of what 
the Chinese call the "cosmic flower".   This was, according to them, 
the source of all power.   The electrical energy which was directed 
into the central coil of the system caused a resonating pulse tuned 
to the natural earth frequency.  This caused an electrical current to 
flow through the secondary coil of the apparatus due to induction. 
The coils were said to be round-shaped in both the primary and 
the secondary.   The secondary coil in one instance was wound in a 
diamond configuration — or wound like a basket. I have a sneaking 
suspicion that the two superimposed coils had a similar configura- 
tion to the Russian grid pattern (pentagonal and triangular), but 
this will have to wait until experiments can be carried out.   (Any 
further factual information from readers will be most welcome.) 
A small outlay of capital and a series of experiments could, with 
a bit of luck, demonstrate one of the methods of extracting free 
energy from the earth.    If the secret can be broken it should be 
possible to run several homes from such a device.  I leave this open 
to those of you who have a streak of inventive genius.

[PAG 116]
1 2>   TESLA - THE FORGOTTEN GENIUS 
98 
Some day I will harness Niagra Falls. — Tesla 
THIS 
WAS 
THE 
STATEMENT 
MADE 
BY 
THE 
greatest electrical genius that ever lived, to one of his fellow 
students, 
in 
Budapest, 
in 
1882. 
Nicola 
Tesla, 
born 
9 
July 
1856, was then aged twenty-five and about to commence a lifetime 
career in the advancement of electrical knowledge which was to 
transform the world. If it were not for this one man, almost all 
modern-day electrical devices would not exist. It therefore seems 
strange that Tesla's name is known to so very few students in our 
universities. Many times I have mentioned Tesla to groups of stu- 
dents, during discussions, and have been met with a blank stare, 
and the question — "Who is Tesla?" 
His birthplace was a small village called Smiijan in the country 
now called Yugoslavia. His father was a minister in the local church. 
His mother was illiterate, but was known in the village as one who 
had a clever and inventive mind. It is said that she invented a 
considerable number of labour saving devices, which could be used 
in the home. In later years Tesla stated that he inherited his 
inventive genius from his mother. 
In one stupendous lifetime he gave us the whole foundation upon 
which to build the industrial empires of the world. It was he who 
invented the alternating-current motors that power every factory 
and production centre. He that designed the transmission systems 
that enabled power to be sent out over vast areas of countryside 
from a central generating source; the mass production systems and 
robot control that freed man from the slavery of labour; the basis for 
radio and radar, and remote control by wireless; modern lighting 
systems by use of high-frequency currents. The list is endless. No 
limit has been found to the electronic marvels which can be pro- 
duced from the basic discoveries which issued from this one fertile 
mind. The whole world owes Tesla its future — and he has been 
forgotten, because he was a man who lived before his time. 
Tesla was one of five children and even at an early age showed 
signs of a lively mind. He found that in many things he could 
surpass other boys of his own age, and this tended to isolate him

[PAG 117]
99 
from his contemporaries.   He found it hard to find others to share 
in his interests and his intellectual attainments were often in ad- 
vance of his years. Nevertheless, it seems that he still got up to all 
the other foolish escapades that young boys find to fill in their time 
- myself included. 
One of the more dangerous ones was trying to emulate a bird. 
He discovered that when he breathed deeply he began to feel very 
light and buoyant.    He considered that this discovery, plus the 
application of daring and an old umbrella, should suffice to free him 
from the pull of gravity and allow him to sail through the air with 
a certain amount of grace and dignity.   He climbed up on the roof 
of a local barn with the trusty old umbrella, breathed a few deep 
breaths and jumped off into space.   The umbrella, not being aero- 
dynamically designed, folded inside out and Tesla carried out a very 
undignified plummet to the ground. This cost him six weeks in bed, 
and much embarrassment. 
His next accomplishment was the invention of a special frog- 
catching hook which was immediately copied by all his friends and 
helped to ensure the demise of most of the frogs in the village pond. 
Then followed a series of gadgets attractive to small boys, which 
included very efficient blowguns and popguns the size of small 
howitzers. Damage to local property caused the sudden end to the 
production of such warlike weapons, and punishment administered 
to the end of Tesla.   At the advanced age of nine years he con- 
structured his first motor. The prime mover of this wondrous machine 
was a formation of sixteen may-bugs. I suppose in a way they could 
have been termed galley bugs, as they had to perform in much the 
same way as the galley slaves of old to produce forward movement 
to the parts of Tesla's machine.   The design was quite ingenious. 
He glued two long thin bits of wood together to form a cross, much 
like the arms of a windmill.   Another thin spindle was attached to 
this with a very small pulley glued to it.   This was connected by a 
belt made from cotton to a larger pulley on another thin spindle. 
The engines (or maybugs) were then glued four abreast, facing forward, 
on each of the four arms. The poor bugs, no doubt dismayed at such 
cavalier treatment, beat their wings at panic speed and turned the 
windmill at a surprising rate. It was Tesla's intention to add more 
bugs, and thus more power to this truly remarkable machine, but 
a young friend decided to eat his jarful of spare bugs.   This nearly 
caused Tesla to throw up, and he ended up destroying his invention 
in disgust.

[PAG 118]
100 
The first stage of his schooling ended in 1870, when he was 
fourteen. The college he attended was called the Real Gymnasium, 
at Gospic. Already he was showing that he was well above the 
average in his abilities. He continued his studies at the higher Real 
Gymnasium, completing the full four-year course in three years. It 
was at this time that he became fascinated with physics and elec- 
trical experimentation and made the decision to devote his life to 
electricity. His father was anxious for him to enter the ministry 
and make a career of the church, but finally relented and promised 
Nicola that he would not prevent him from having his wish. The 
boy had overworked himself so much with his studies that he had 
weakened his body and been attacked, first by malaria then a severe 
bout of cholera. When nearly at death's door he whispered to his 
father, "I will get well again if you will let me study electrical 
engineering." He was promised by his father that he would attend 
the most advanced engineering school in the world. Tesla was 
nineteen when he began his studies in electrical engineering at the 
Polytechnic Institute at Gratz, Austria. 
It was at the Institute that particular insights into the mysteries 
of electricity by Tesla first began to show themselves. A Professor 
Poeschl was demonstrating a gramme machine that could be used 
as either a dynamo or a motor. It was run by direct current and 
suffered a great loss of efficiency due to sparking at the commuta- 
tor. (The commutator was necessary in all direct current machines 
to change the flow of electricity at the correct instant to obtain 
rotary motion.) 
An argument developed between the professor and Tesla as to 
the design of the machine and the necessity to use direct current. 
Why cannot alternating current be used, suggested Tesla? This 
would eliminate the need for commutators and thus increase effi- 
ciency. The alternating current produced by the dynamos could be 
fed 
direct 
to 
the 
motors 
without 
the 
use 
of 
the 
reversing 
mechanisms. 
The professor set up a special set of experiments to prove to Tesla 
that his idea was completely impractical and made the statement: 
"Mr. Tesla will accomplish great things, but he certainly will never 
do this. It would be eq