=== The energy grid - Harmonic 695. The pulse of the universe (Bruce L. Cathie).pdf — CHUNK 1/12 ===
Chars: 44,364 | Offset: 0

[PAG 3]
AUTHORS NOTE 
THIS 
BOOK 
IS 
A 
REVISED 
 
COMBINATION 
 
OF 
MY 
second and third books, "Harmonic 695, the UFO and Anti- 
gravity" 
and, 
"The 
Pulse 
of 
the 
Universe, 
Harmonic 
288". 
The contents have been up-dated in relation to my present Knowl- 
edge. 
To do this I have deleted a small amount of material which I now 
believe to be inaccurate, or covered in a more comprehensible form 
in my later works; corrected, or added, material necessary to ex- 
plain my theories as clearly as possible. 
I realise that I cannot be one hundred percent correct at all times 
in my speculations, but if some progress is being made in new 
concepts, then I am more than satisfied. A fantastic future awaits 
us if we can unravel the secrets underlying the basic structure of 
the universe.

[PAG 4]
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
For the quotations from published material reproduced in the text 
and the illustrations in this book I am indebted to the following: 
Definitions: 
Britannica World Standard Dictionary. 
The New Zealand Scientific and Space Research Organization, 
Auckland. 
Behind the Flying Saucers by Frank Scully, Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston, Inc., New York. 
The City of Revelation by John Mitchell.    Garnstone Press Ltd., 
London. 
John Tunstall: article in The Times, London, July, 1969. 
The  Great Pyramid: Its Divine Message by D. Davidson and. 
Aldersmith.   William Rider and Son Ltd., London. 
The Pyramid and its Relationship to Biocosmic Energy by G. Pat- 
rick Flanagan. 
Physics, Part 1 by Robert Resnick and David Halliday. John Wiley 
and Sons Ltd., New York and London. 
Flying Saucers Have Landed by Desmond Leslie and George Adamski. 
Werner Laurie, London. 
The Story of the Laser by John Carroll.  The Scientific Book Club, 
London. 
A Beam of Light by Gaston Burridge.  Rosicrucian Digest, March, 
1961. 
The Secret of Life by G. Lakhovsky.  Health Science Press, Sussex. 
The Changing Universe by John Pfeiffer.   London.

[PAG 5]
New Home for America's Doomsday Radio": New Scientist. 16 August, 
1973. 
Cast the Bush by Len Beadell.    The Griffon Press, Rigby Ltd., 
elaide. 
Le Marshall Cavendish Dictionary of Medicine.   Marshall Cav- 
dish. 
Antarctic Base for N-Testing" by Gilbert Sedbon, Sunday Herald, 
Lckland, 7 October, 1973. 
PRO Bulletin: March/April 1973. 
The Prodigal Genius by John J. O'Neill. Neville Spearman, London. 
Pyramids Versus the Space Age" by John Tunstall. The Times. 
London, 26 July, 1969. 
Proceedings", Volume 10, 1974, No. 6 by George W. Van Tassel, 
Rocca Valley, California. 
Aalso thank my colleague Mr. Donald Offwood for permission to 
produce his report "On an Investigation into Electroculture 1972, 
1973". 
Bruce Leonard Cathie

[PAG 6]
CONTENTS 
Preface....................................    xi 
Definition of Terms...........................   xii 
Introduction................................  xiv 
1.   The Branching Areas for Investigation.........      1 
2.   Mathematics of the World Grid...............    15 
3.   The Unified Equations......................   33 
4.   Further Evidence of the UFO Grid............    43 
5.   The Mysterious Aerials.....................   49 
6.   Scientists and the UFOs.....................   57 
7.   Mathematical Values of Interest...............   69 
8.   The Earth's Magnetic Field..................   80 
9.   Pythagoras and the Grid....................   85 
10.   The Maps of the Ancients...................   89 
11.   Russians and Germans Discover a World 
Grid System.............................   92 
12.   Tesla — The Forgotten Genius................   98 
13.    Space Communication......................117 
14.   Where Have All The Flyers Gone..............123 
15.    People We Would Like to Know More About......131 
16.   The Secret of Life.........................141 
17.   The Harmonics of Humans...................159 
18.   Builders in Stone.........................164 
v

[PAG 7]
CONTENTS (CONTINUED) 
19.   From Alpha to Omega......................174 
20.   There is Something in the Air................183 
21.   Ooparts and Oopths........................197 
22.   Spaceship or Survey Peg?...................204 
23.   Ruapehu Erupts..........................210 
24.   The Australian Stonehenge..................213 
25.   The Organization of a Miracle................223 
26.   The Diminutive Man of Mystery...............232 
27.   Bits and Pieces...........................239 
28.   Coincidental Pattern of Oil Wells..............244 
29.   Wake Up Earth...........................247 
VI

[PAG 8]
LIST OF DIAGRAMS 
No:                                                                               Page 
1.   Formation of matter and anti-matter..............    11 
2.   Showing the relationship of the Grid structure 
to the geographic poles.......................    27 
3.   Showing the relationship of a Grid polar square 
to the geographic pole........................    31 
4.   Showing the relationship of Grid polar squares 
A,B, and C...............................    32 
5.   Showing that all spherical bodies have a harmonic affinity 
with the harmonic reciprocal of the speed of light.....   72 
6.   The harmonics of a Decagon...................    77 
7.   Probable centre of projection for the Piri Re'is map ....   91 
8.   World Grid system discovered by the Russians........    96 
9.   Tesla transmitter site........................  115 
10. 
 
 
The 
geometric 
relationship 
of 
proposed 
underground 
antenna to Grid harmonics....................  121 
11. 
 
 
Theoretical 
Grid 
structure 
of 
proposed 
underground 
antenna.................................  122 
12.   Estimated flight path of five Avenger aircraft at the 
time of disappearance........................  130 
13.   Showing dimensions of "Deland" ground aerial........  143 
vu

[PAG 9]
4.   Showing type of wire loop aerial to enhance plant 
growth..................................149 
5.   The geometry of the DNA molecule...............162 
6.   The basic OMEGA transmitter..................175 
7.   The relationship of the Tunguska explosion to 
the Polar section of the UFO Grid................207 
8.   Location of the Atomic Bomb site:  Australia.........217 
9.   The making of a Miracle......................231 
10.   The geometric position of Coral Castle.............236 
11.   Coral Castle and the World Grid.................237 
viu

[PAG 10]
LIST OF TABLES 
No:                                                                                           Page 
1.    Showing growth pattern of test plants...............  145 
2.    Showing average height increase of test plants.........  150 
3.    Showing growth and height of test plants.  Row "A"......  153 
4.    Showing growth and height of test plants.  Row "B"......  154 
5.    Showing growth and height of test plants.  Row "C"......  155 
6.    Showing growth and height of test plants.  Row "D"......  156 
7.   Showing comparison of left and right hand aerial loops ....  157 
PHOTOCOPY 
No:                                                                                    Page 
1.   Aerial type object photographed by the survey 
ship "ELTANIN"............................   26 
2.   Predictions of Atomic Tests....................   47 
3.   Photos showing cut flagstones at "Stonehenge 
Platform" site.............................222 
4.   Copy of letter from chief engineer; Minister of Works . . . 246 
IX

[PAG 11]
LIST OF MAPS 
No.                                                                                    Page 
1.   UFO sightings in Hawke's Bay area..............      9 
2.   Showing the track of a UFO from the Kaipara 
Harbour to D'Urville Island....................   21 
3.   Original Grid map over New Zealand.............   24 
4.   Section of Grid "A" over Auckland area............   62 
5.   Section of Grid over Auckland City showing 
positions of UFO activity......................    67 
6.   Estimated, intended, flight path of five Avenger aircraft. . 129 
7.   Lake Pearson site for OMEGA station.............178 
8.   Position of proposed OMEGA station on Grid map.....182 
9.   Showing track of Tunguska "Meteorite"............206 
10.   Showing position of "Native Stonehenge"...........220 
11.   EMU:  Atomic Bomb test site...................221 
12.   Showing path of the EXODUS..................229 
13.   Coincidental pattern of oil wells.................245

[PAG 12]
PREFACE 
THE UNIVERSE IS A LIVING INTELLIGENCE 
ITS   HEARTBEATS   THUNDER  AT   THE   CENTRE   OF 
galaxies and whisper in the nucleus of atoms. With the spiral- 
ing wave-forms of its own essence it creates from within its 
infinite depths the matter which constitutes all physical substances, 
living or inanimate.  It was-it is-it always will be-timeless. 
We are created by this intelligence from the same myriad of 
wave-forms that interlace the depths of space, connecting all things. 
We and it are one. For all truth and wisdom look within, for we are 
a shimmering mass of miniature stars and worlds, with emerald 
seas and sandy shores, which in their turn provide home for intel- 
ligence. 
XI

[PAG 13]
DEFINITION OF TERMS 
Harmony and harmonic etc. as defined by the Britannica World 
Standard Dictionary: 
1.   HARMONY: A state of order, agreement, or completeness in 
the relations of things, or of parts of a whole to each other. 
2.   HARMONIC: Producing, characterised by, or pertaining to 
harmony. 
(a)   MUSIC: Pertaining to a tone whose rate of vibration is an 
exact multiple of a given primary tone. 
(b)   MATHEMATICAL; Derived from, or originally suggested by, 
the numerical relations between the vibrations of the musical 
harmonies, or overtones, of the same fundamental tone: Har- 
monic functions. 
(c)   PHYSICS: Any component of a periodic quantity, which is an 
integral multiple of the fundamental frequency.  In this book 
we 
discuss 
the 
fundamental 
harmonies 
of 
the 
vibrational 
fre- 
quencies 
which 
form 
the 
building-blocks 
of 
our 
immediate 
universe: and that of the theoretical anti-universe which modern 
scientists 
have 
postulated 
as 
existing 
in 
mirror-like 
image 
of 
our own. We theorise that the whole of physical reality which 
is tangible to us is formed from the basic geometric harmo- 
nies, or harmonics, of the angular velocities, or wave forms of 
light. From these basic harmonies, or resonating wave forms, 
myriads 
of 
other 
waves 
are 
created 
which 
blend 
in 
sympa- 
thetic resonance, one with the other, thus forming the physi- 
cal 
structures. 
Einstein 
stated 
that 
the 
geometric 
structure 
of 
space time determines the physical processes. 
We theorise that space and time manifest from the geomet- 
ric harmonies of the wave motions of light. The fundamen- 
tal 
harmonic 
of 
light 
in 
geometric 
terms 
being 
an 
angular 
velocity 
of 
144,000 
minutes 
of 
arc 
per 
grid 
second. 
There 
being 97,200 grid seconds to one revolution of the earth. 
xii

[PAG 14]
The reciprocal harmonic of light, or 1/144,000 being 694444, 
repeating. It was found that to calculate the values of har- 
monic 
wave 
forms 
that 
have 
sympathetic 
resonance, 
it 
was 
possible to disregard zero's to the right, or left, of whole numbers 
and 
extract 
the 
values 
direct 
from 
the 
mathematical 
tables. 
Harmonic 
69444 
therefore 
refers 
to 
the 
geometric 
recipro- 
cal of light, which in theory forms the basic building-block of 
the anti-universe, or region of negative reality. 
8. ANTI-MATTER: A hypothetical form of matter in which all the 
component particles, as protons, electrons, etc., are assumed to 
carry charges opposite to those associated with the correspond- 
ing particles of the known universe. 
4. ANTI-GRAVITY: In the known universe all physical matter 
has a common gravitational attraction or tendency to coalesce 
together. As the word itself suggests, a body under the influ- 
ence of antigravitational fields would be repulsed or tend to 
move away from normal physical matter. 
It has been found in later research that the harmonic of the speed 
of light varies in relation to the geometric distance from the centre 
of the earth. The value at various levels, from the centre to the 
edge of the atmosphere, is demonstrated in my fourth book, "The 
Bridge to Infinity, Harmonic 371244." 
xiu

[PAG 15]
INTRODUCTION 
WAKE 
UP 
EARTH! 
THE 
SIGNALS 
HAVE 
BEEN 
received. 
First, 
in 
1927 
by 
American 
experimenters 
Tay- 
lor 
and 
Young, 
from 
apparent 
distances 
of 
2,900 
to 
10,000 
Km. Halls, an engineer, reported to Carl Stormer of Oslo that 
echoes of 3 seconds delay had been heard at Eindhoven, Holland. 
On 11th October 1928 Carl Stormer, with Halls, helped by Van der 
Pol transmitting from Eindhoven, picked up 3-second echoes on 31.4 
meters, which changed to echoes varying from 3 to 15 seconds. The 
signal pulses were transmitted at 20 second intervals. Echoes were 
received in the following delay sequence: 8, 11-15, 8,13,3,8,8,8- 
12,15,13,8,8.   In two cases echoes were heard 4 seconds apart. 
The consensus was: that the signals were saying — Here I am in 
the orbit of your Moon. 
And nobody wanted to listen. 
More 
than 
twenty 
years 
have 
passed 
since 
I 
presented 
the 
manuscript for my first book, HARMONIC 33, for publication. In 
it I related the findings — up to the time — of my investigations 
into the mystery of unidentified flying objects. 
Amongst other interesting facts, I had discovered evidence of a 
world energy grid system and little did I know then that I had 
opened up a line of enquiry which would cause me to get attention 
from the intelligence agencies of several of the major countries around 
the world. It soon became obvious that I had discovered something 
that many of the worlds power groups preferred to remain unknown 
to the general public. As time went on it was admitted that the 
world grid did exist, but it was considered that it was not yet time 
to openly admit to a source of almost free energy. Energy means 
power in more ways than one. 
As my work has progressed I have found more than enough 
evidence to convince me that the public is not being informed of the 
most fantastic and advanced scientific discoveries in the history of 
man. After forty years of sightings, scientists, and government 
agencies, are still trying to convince the public that Unidentified 
Flying Objects are figments of the imagination. I state, without any 
doubt whatever, that the public is being conned. UFOs do exist; 
they are interdimensional anti-gravity machines. 
xiv

[PAG 16]
I believe that many of the machines sighted are visiting us from 
outer space, but a great number of sightings are of machines pro- 
duced by our own scientists on Earth. The secrets of anti-gravity 
and free energy production are known in top scientific circles and 
they will go to any length to keep this knowledge from us. 
Many reasons could be given for the suppression but I believe 
that one of the main ones is the financial consequences of complete 
release of such advanced technology on the world economy. This 
would certainly be a problem, but the longer things are left the way 
they are the greater the problem is going to be. 
Whatever the reasons are, we have the right to know the truth 
and it is up to every one of us to demand that the truth be given. 
Every day, somewhere in the world, there are verified sightings 
of UFOs. While the sceptics continue to assert that such normal 
circumstances as marsh gas, eye floaters, the rising and setting of 
Venus, or the flashing of car headlights against banks of low clouds, 
account for UFO sightings, they have nothing to say about the 
growing number of radar reports which indicate that physical ob- 
jects, not always visible to the human eye, are continuing to frequent 
our airspace. Vehicles in the sky appear to watchers in the far 
corners of the globe; they carry out elaborate manoeuvers, then fade 
from sight; or they leave the area at fantastic speed, leaving bewil- 
derment, excitement, confusion or outright fear behind them. 
Within the last week there has been an incident which has hit 
the headlines worldwide. The event occurred in the early morning 
hours of January 20 1988, about 40 Km west of Mundrabilla, near 
the western Australian   border. 
Fay Knowles and her three Sons, Patrick (24), Sean (21), and 
Wayne (18), watched a glowing object which resembled a giant egg 
in an egg cup, chase a truck and a car, which were travelling in the 
opposite direction, before it turned and hovered over their own vehicle. 
They said it picked the car up off the road, shook it quite violently, 
turned it in the opposite direction, then forced it down again with 
such pressure that one of the tyres was blown. Crime investigators 
from Port Lincoln examined the car, which was covered in an ash- 
like substance and sent samples from the interior and exterior to 
Adelaide for forensic examination. 
It was reported that a similar incident involved a police officer in 
the United States some years ago. 
The explanations for the occurrence have been more bizarre than 
the story itself.   One academic said it could have been caused by a 
xv

[PAG 17]
carbonaceous meteorite, "which could do this sort of thing." I wonder 
how much longer the public will accept such obvious nonsense. 
As long as there are inexplicable activities in the skies and on the 
ground and as long as my existing theories continue to be supported 
by facts and reports from many parts of the world, I will not be 
satisfied until I am able to approach one of the vehicles closely, 
examine it in detail, and if possible communicate with one of the 
beings who control it. 
The knowledge I now possess is far in advance of that which I 
had when I was preparing my earlier works. A great deal has 
happened that has tended to confirm my basic calculations and 
theories. Moreover, the acceptability gap is constantly narrowing; 
thousands of people who have never given serious thought to UFOs 
are suddenly turning to all the available reference material in search 
for a glimmering of the truth. 
During my many years of research I have uncovered a consider- 
able body of evidence pointing to the existence of projects being 
carried out on a world-wide basis which have direct connections 
with UFOs. From this evidence the logical conclusion is that top 
scientists and electronic engineers have direct contact and commu- 
nication with UFOs. 
I also believe it is most probable that a Moon-base has already 
been established by our own scientists. The advanced technology 
would give them this capability. When the rocket program was 
wound down years ago, it was probably because it was obsolete. 
As I continued making my discoveries — the existence of a vast 
power grid, the devises contrived to establish communication be- 
tween some groups on this planet and the UFOs — I made a point 
of keeping interested parties in government aware of them, fully 
expecting to be either dismissed as a crank, or at least, to be told 
to stop my activities. Much to my surprise I was given every en- 
couragement to continue with my probing and to publish whatever 
information came to light. Possibly this is the first time that any 
government has ever authorised a civilian to pursue unrestricted 
research into UFO phenomena. 
Among other things, I have discovered a series of Harmonic 
geometric equations which, when put into practical application, will 
cause reactions in space-time. 
During the 1968 series of nuclear explosion tests by the French 
at Mururoa Island in the Pacific, it was requested by the head of a 
government department that I provide a list of pre-calculated explo- 
xvi

[PAG 18]
sion dates. In my earlier publications I had indicated how geomet- 
ric factors determined any possibility of a nuclear explosion, or 
reaction. I supplied the dates, as requested, and later on I was in- 
formed that my calculations had been passed on from Auckland to 
the heads of four other government departments before the actual 
tests were carried out. My calculations proved correct. This infor- 
mation is now in the files of the government authorities concerned. 
If they are not already aware, then events of this order must 
sooner or later command the attention of international scientific 
organizations. One day the scientists will no longer be able to turn 
their backs on the basic precepts of true science. They will have to 
examine all evidence impartially before they reach their conclusions 
— and instead of offering only ridicule, carry out a full world-wide 
investigation into all the phenomena related to UFOs, and the world 
grid energy system. Facts cannot be ignored forever; although it is 
obvious to all thinking people that there are interests that would 
very much prefer the world to be kept in ignorance and in culti- 
vated indifference for as long as possible. 
My investigations have led me into many by-ways, not all of 
them of great moment, or interest to others than myself. The workload 
of my studies has increased enormously; and yet there are facts, as 
well as hypotheses, which I feel must be brought to the notice of the 
public urgently. 
Some of the information will be found in the following pages of 
this updated book. 
xvii

[PAG 19]
1>   THE BRANCHING AREAS FOR INVESTIGATION 
WHAT 
IS 
HAPPENING 
TO 
THE 
CLASSICAL 
IDEAS 
of 
scientific 
research? 
It 
has 
always 
been 
my 
understand- 
ing 
that 
the 
basic 
attitude 
towards 
any 
scientific 
investi- 
gation should be one of non-bias.   The scientist, I understood, was 
it person who collected all available data on the subject of his study, 
weighed it and interpreted it, and reached certain conclusions about 
it without prejudice and without preconceived notions. 
Today Science is up on a pedestal. A new god has appeared; his 
high priests conduct the rituals, with nuclear reactors, moon-prob- 
ing rocket ships, cathode tubes and laser beams. And their territory 
is sacrosanct; laymen are denied entry. 
A letter to an Auckland newspaper signed by Robert Adams, 
chairman of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers of 
the USA, New Zealand section, referring to the proposed installa- 
tion of an Omega station, states with supreme satisfaction: "It is not 
for laymen to pass comment on such installations."1 
As the more advanced nations lead the way into a state of tech- 
nocracy, it becomes more and more apparent that the laymen of the 
world will have no more say in this planet's affairs than did the 
slaves of Pharaoh. Already there are clear indications that the 
scientific Establishment in a number of countries is able to operate, 
nnd to conduct activities with government funds without having to 
account scrupulously to government or citizenry just what those 
activities are. There is an open and manifest activity in certain 
directions, but there is reason to suspect that this often cloaks an 
inner, secret activity — an activity in which government and people 
have no say. Already scientists speak among themselves in a lan- 
guage that is no longer public property. Have they, despairing of 
the muddled state of the world's affairs, banded together in a mod- 
ern — day monastic order of their own, with the aim of taking over 
entirely the affairs of the earth? 
There is an enormously vast mass of data that has never been 
explained satisfactorily, ranging through every branch of every rec- 
ognized science; the indefatigable Charles Fort referred to this body 
xNew Zealand Herald, 17 January, 1969

[PAG 20]
of data as the "damned" — damned by science because it did not fit 
in anywhere, and so in order to preserve the status quo of the 
scientific Establishment, had to be rejected and ignored. 
UFOs are in the category of the damned. Never before has 
public interest been so high in flying saucers, strange aerial lights 
and objects, reported landings, unidentified submarine objects, alien 
voices speaking no known earthly language on low-frequency radio 
bands, unexplained explosions which coincide very often with sight- 
ings of UFOs, and a host of related phenomena. There is no exist- 
ing science capable of neatly fitting in all this data and offering a 
consistent explanation. To acknowledge what millions of laymen 
around the world already know — that UFOs do exist — would 
result in a complete upset of the scientific Establishment. The facts 
are all there, staring blind science in the face. But the facts are un- 
acceptable; therefore, UFOs don't exist. 
There is nothing new in this attitude; the only thing new is that 
the establishment itself has changed. In medieval times "Establish- 
ment" meant the ruling families of Europe, in the West; the knowl- 
edge then being built up and explored by people known as "witches" 
and "alchemists" was contrary to accepted theories about reality. 
The penalty for these seekers of truth was frequently a lingering 
death. 
Today science is on the throne, but nothing else has changed. 
Uncomfortable data are still rejected and filed away somewhere, at 
best as "curiosities." 
In examining his data, with a clear, unbiased attitude, the true 
researcher must correctly reject all those which are clearly not free 
of doubtful accuracy; but after all his sifting, if even one datum 
remains that cannot be ignored, it is obviously his duty to come to 
grips with it. 
UFOs 
are 
notoriously 
nothing 
more 
than 
"hallucinations," 
but 
even if we allow for all the unwitting or otherwise human errors of 
observation, there is still the implacable scientific and impersonal 
evidence of radar to be accounted for. 
Radar is not subject to hallucinations. It records the presence of 
solid objects, establishes their movement patterns, tracks their flight. 
Auckland's radar station at Mangere is only one such station of 
thousands throughout the world which is habitually recording the 
presence in the sky of unidentified moving objects — moving too 
fast to be explained as birds or aircraft and moving in flight pat- 
terns impossible for any kind of earth-made craft. There have been

[PAG 21]
many occasions when radar control has directed incoming aircraft 
to areas nearby where objects are "seen" by radar; frequently the 
pilots have been unable to detect anything visible. While they search 
for the object, the radar follows the search; the unseen object's "blip" 
is watched on the radar viewing screen; it plays leapfrog with the 
searching aircraft, bobs up and down like a yo-yo, or veers away and 
moves off at a fantastic speed. Inexplicable, yes — by our present 
understanding. But does evidence of this kind also have to be 
rejected, ignored, tucked away for "future reference"? It would 
appear so. 
In January 1969 the University of Colorado issued a report on a 
UFO investigation endorsed by a panel of "leading scientists" con- 
vened by the National Academy of Sciences. 
"Our general conclusion," according to the bulky report, "is that 
nothing has come from the study of UFOs in the past twenty-one 
years that has added to scientific knowledge." This is of course 
double-talk; it does not deny the existence of UFOs outright, but 
merely publicly admits that science has failed to come to grips with 
the world-wide phenomena. 
The panel of scientists noted that the report concedes a residue 
of "perplexing episodes." 
At England's Lakenheath airbase, used by both the USAF and 
the RAF in 1956, radar operators on the ground detected "one or 
more" targets moving apparently at speeds as great as 2000 or 4000 
mph, although there were no sonic booms. They made right-angle 
turns at a 'Tew hundred miles an hour" (an impossible manoeuvre 
for terrestrial craft). 
Two RAF fighters were sent out, and one obtained radar gunlock 
on the target. But the object, whatever it was, circled the fighter's 
tail and remained there in spite of all evasion attempts. The plane 
eventually had to land in order to refuel, and ground staff saw "one 
or more white rapidly moving objects." 
This is but one example of the inexplicable residue which flatly 
refuses to be categorised or classified into some convenient pigeon- 
hole of knowledge. There were fifty-nine cases cited by the report 
as being of "special interest from several hundred" that were 
reviewed. 
Mr. William Ryan (Democrat, New York), the congressman in 
Washington who is also the voice of the National Investigations 
Committee on Aerial Phenomena (NICAP), which has about 10,000 
members in some forty countries, told the House of Representatives:

[PAG 22]
A Federal UFO surveillance programme should be set up.   UFOs 
cannot be wished away, and reported sightings will persist." 
And NICAP added a bombshell of its own: it claimed to have 
proof that the Colorado investigation team had never intended to 
study UFOs objectively, but had intentionally fitted its data into a 
negative report. 
Reading of this, I was inevitably reminded of a document in my 
possession. It is a copy of a directive to USAF investigators of UFO 
reports; it is signed by General Curtis LeMay, who was at the time 
of its publication chief of the USAF. In effect it instructs investi- 
gating officers of UFO reports how to denigrate UFO reports, how 
to play them down and how to offer logical explanations for various 
phenomena. It does not suggest that UFO sightings are to be 
considered worthy of a fuller study. 
I wonder: can scientists really be as hollow as they appear to be? 
Do they really imagine the much-despised laymen of the world will 
settle for shrugged shoulders and a shroud of marsh gas? 
I wonder: couldn't it be that the scientists already have the full 
explanation of UFOs — and for reasons not yet clear, are deliber- 
ately keeping the knowledge as a jealously-guarded secret within 
their own closed ranks? 
Incredible as it may seem, this appears to be the truth. I have 
amassed a considerable amount of evidence which strongly suggests 
that scientists in a number of countries not only know a great deal 
about UFOs, they also know how to keep in contact with them. I 
believe that from such contacts there has already been a consider- 
able exchange of information. I believe that the Establishment has 
gone through a phase of shock, amounting to severe trauma, as new 
knowledge has been revealed, and that there is not one science, not 
one major industry, that can remain unaffected by what the scien- 
tists have already learned. The rocket programmes of the Soviet 
Union and the United States, the transportation systems of the 
world, the power supply authorities and every conceivable kind of 
industry would be rendered obsolete if a new, unsuspected yet uni- 
versally available system of power were to become available. I be- 
lieve the earth is on the brink of having access to that power source. 
I am neither a naive fantasy fan, nor a proselytizer of any par- 
ticular brand of faith. I am in complete accord with the French 
authors, Louis Pauwels and Jacques Bergior1, in that I declare: it is 
lThe Dawn of Magic, 1963

[PAG 23]
not necessary to believe everything; it is only necessary to look at 
everything, to study and to examine everything; to explore with an 
unbiased mind, free of bigotry; to sift evidence and known facts, and 
upon these to reach certain tentative conclusions which are not the 
product of preconcieved notions. I hope that at least a large number 
of readers will feel the same way. 
The road towards an equation began with the discovery that 
there exists on this globe an all-encompassing grid, the interlocking 
lines of which correspond to the lines of flight of verified UFO 
appearances. It would be in order here to recapitulate briefly, the 
theories and calculations regarding the nature of that grid. 
First of all, a geometric pattern of UFO activity was discovered 
which indicated a definite purpose in the presence of UFOs about 
our planetary surface. Having established the pattern of the grid, 
the next step was to break it down into mathematical co-ordinates. 
When this was done, it was found that all the values represented in 
the grid had direct harmonic relationships with the speed of light, 
gravity and earth mass. 
Once these relationships became clear it was possible to theorise 
on the method of propulsion employed by the UFOs. It would appear 
that by setting up a harmonic imbalance of gravitational forces, the 
UFOs are able to reposition themselves in space-time; that is, the 
UFO moves from one point to another in order to restore the bal- 
ance of the forces caused by space-time geometries. I hope the full 
meaning of this concept will become completely clear as we proceed. 
The thinking up to this point followed rationally from the theo- 
ries of Einstein which state, in part, that the geometric relation- 
ships of space and time control all physical processes. 
My findings led me to conclude, further, that volcanic activity, 
atomic disruption (nuclear bomb detonations) and earthquakes could 
all be related to the grid structure, an atomic bomb being a space- 
time geometric device, and volcanos and earthquakes occurring on 
geometric points of the grid system, due to disturbances at these 
points. 
A correlation of all these different phenomena led me to conclude 
that all major changes of physical state, anywhere in the world, are 
brought about by the harmonic interactions of those manifestations 
which we refer to as: light; gravity; mass; and electrical and mag- 
netic forces. 
The controlled manipulation of these resonant factors would, in 
my hypothesis, make it possible to move mass from one point to

[PAG 24]
another in space-time (that is, to the eye of a theoretical observer, 
instantaneously); or to change the form of mass to a more, or to a 
less, tangible state. The contraction or expansion of time could also 
be controlled by the same manipulations of harmonic pulsations, or 
resonances, since time has a direct relationship with the speed of 
light. The "speed of light", as we call it, is not a constant, contrary 
to all the declarations of the scientific establishment. In theory, for 
this is yet to be demonstrably proven, there is no limit to the speed 
of light. 
The concept of relativity has been with us for a long time; it 
reached its clearest expression at the hands of Albert Einstein. Now, 
a study of UFOs can show us some of the practical applications of 
the theory. 
It is commonly believed that Einstein expressly declared that the 
speed of light was an absolute, and that nothing could exist beyond 
this speed. Biologist Ivan T. Sanderson states in a recent book1 that 
shortly before his death, Einstein denied that he had ever made any 
such statement: "What he did say was that around 186,000 miles 
per second mass would become infinite — that your backside would 
become your frontside, and time (as we conceive it) would come to 
a stop — in other words, there is no reason, theoretical or otherwise, 
why that particular speed cannot be exceeded." 
There is also a widely-held belief, possibly one that has been 
deliberately encouraged, that Einstein's work on his "unified field 
theory" had not reached its final stage when his death left this work 
to be completed, presumably, by still other brilliant minds yet to 
develop. But Sanderson asserts that Dr. B. Russell has privately 
stated that Einstein completed his theory before his death. There 
is evidence to suggest that Dr. Russell might be correct. 
In 1945 secret experiments were carried out in the mid-Pacific by 
American scientists. A unified force field was created, and a ship 
of the US Navy, fully crewed, was made to disappear. Ivan Sander- 
son and others have brought forward further detailed evidence in 
their own books. 
Over the past few months I have found evidence which strongly 
suggests that the unified field concept has been incorporated in the 
UFO grid system, in a harmonic sense. By doubling the C, or light 
values in the harmonic unified field equation based on the famous 
Uninvited Visitors, 1968

[PAG 25]
Einstein equation (E = MC2), a gravitational effect becomes possible. 
But I will leave the full explanation of this to another place. 
In Harmonic 33 it was my endeavor to establish that the har- 
monic equivalents of light, gravity and mass and so on are built into 
the global UFO grid system as geometric, or angular, units, and are 
expressed as minute of arc values. Some of these values are as fol- 
lows: 
Speed of light harmonic: 1439 
Anti-speed of light harmonic: 695 
Harmonics associated with the earth's magnetic field: 2545.5 and 
3930. 
Earth mass harmonic: 1703 
Logarithmic and radian values as well as trignometrical values were 
also found to be harmonically tuned to the geometric pattern of the 
system. 
At that time my calculations were taken only to four-figure accuracy, 
chiefly because this enabled me to carry out my calculations more 
easily. My log tables only run to four figures in any case, and it 
would have taken many months of additional work to find all the 
correlations if I had had to work with, say, seven- or eight-figure 
harmonics. 
But in recent months, thanks to the receipt of much new infor- 
mation coming to me, as I shall explain later, I did extend my 
harmonics to five figures. I then found a harmonic unified field 
equation. 
The main lattice type pattern of the grid, I had found, consisted 
of areas of 30 minutes of arc oriented approximately north-south 
(006° true) and 30 minutes of arc approximately east-west (276° 
true). Subsequently, it has been my discovery that these areas are 
further divisible into sixteen smaller areas, measuring 7.5 by 7.5 
minutes 
of 
arc. 
Note: 
For all practical purposes the orientation of the system has been 
stated as 006 degrees true, according to the accuracy of the plotted 
grid on my original maps. Recent computer work allows the possi- 
bility that the actual orientation could be: 5.90165 degrees. 
The harmonic reciprocal of this value is 0.169444. This would 
create a direct harmonic relationship with mass, as discovered in 
later research. 
Recent radar and verified visual sightings of UFOs, plus a large 
volume of evidence coming to light in the New Zealand area alone,

[PAG 26]
have verified the existence of the grid in the pattern. I have de- 
scribed it beyond any shadow of reasonable doubt. 
Furthermore, the creation of a complex network of manned radio 
stations within the structure of the UFO grid system proves not 
only that the system is there, but also that our technical experts 
have a knowledge of it, an understanding of it, and through it, 
direct communication with the UFOs themselves. 
Incredible? In the framework of conventional thinking, and in 
the light of concepts which we have been conditioned to accept 
as 
the 
cornerstones 
of 
what 
we 
euphemistically 
call 
reality, 
my statements may indeed seem beyond belief. I do not intend to 
allow my incredible statements to remain hovering in mid-air, as it 
were. 
In this book I shall be presenting a variety of evidence, facts and 
hypotheses. I hope to answer at least some of the important ques- 
tions that must arise; and I hope to point the way in which other 
investigators, perhaps infinitely more competent than myself, may 
travel in the search for truth. 
Meanwhile, I must at this stage offer some evidence to the doubt- 
ful that the grid really does exist. 
I am satisfied that there is an overwhelming body of evidence 
that provides all the proof necessary, and that establishes that the 
harmonic radiations emanating from it are in turn causing certain 
physical effects at specific localities. Moreover, the activities of 
scientists in certain key areas indicate that there is feverish, gov- 
ernment or otherwise backed, activity going on in connection with 
research into the basic structure and character of the grid. 
My grid system, drawn up on a map of New Zealand, was completed 
in 1965. As verified sighting reports came to hand, I plotted on this 
map the precise positions of the sightings, and not to my surprise 
found that invariably the UFO positions fell with uncanny precision 
on the grid's lines of longitude or latitude — never in the interven- 
ing spaces. 
In September 1967 reports came of four accurate fixes of UFO 
sightings a few minutes apart in the Hawke's Bay area (Map 1). 
Here were no isolated sightings, but four, all within a short period 
of time and in a relatively small area. 
When I plotted the position of these four verified sightings on the 
grid map I found they fell exactly on four parallel lines of grid lati- 
tude. One was over the city of Napier, one to the north-west, one 
to the north-east, and one to the south-east. As I told an Auckland

[PAG 27]
MAP 1 
 
A portion of the grid superimposed on the Hawke's Bay area 
where UFO sightings were reported. The four sightings (ringed) 
coincide perfectly with the lines of the grid which had been 
drawn 
up 
three 
years 
previously 
on 
the 
basis 
of 
confirmed 
sightings throughout New Zealand. 
reporter at that time: "The Hawke's Bay sightings provide the most 
Impressive evidence to date in support of my grid theory." 
The UFO, or UFOs, incidentally, were seen on 3 September 1967 
by residents of Hastings, Pakowhai, Wairoa and the Esk Valley. 
Did I somehow employ ESP when I constructed the grid map 
three years earlier - predicting, as it were, by means of lines on a 
map just where future sightings would be made? 
We are told by the scientists that, theoretically, there should be 
a region of negative matter in the universe.  This would constitute 
a negative  reality  that would  consist of matter made  up  of

[PAG 28]
anti-protons, anti-electrons and anti-neutrons etc. If any particle of 
matter from the negative reality were to drift into, and come in 
contact with, a particle in our positive reality there would be instan- 
tannihilation of both particles. A Cosmic atomic explosion. This 
sounds all very well and would create some sort of symetry in the 
Universe, but they never explain where the boundary is between 
the two regions. Space is not empty, as most people imagine. There 
are all sorts of particles drifting round in space which could light 
the fuse of such a system. If this were so I believe the Universe 
would be a very dangerous place to live in. 
My fundamental theory concerning the formation of particles of 
matter and anti-matter is as follows: 
First, matter and anti-matter are formed by the same wave motions 
in space. The waves travel through space in a spiralling motion, 
and alternately pass through positive and negative stages. Matter 
is formed through the positive stage, or pulse, and anti-matter during 
the negative pulse. 
An electron is formed by three spiraling wave motions in space. 
These waves pass through each other at 90°. The point of intersec- 
tion in space causes the manifestation of what we term electrons. 
The electron thus formed carries out a spiraling motion. 
Each spiral of 360° forms a single pulse. The circular motion of 
an electron about the nucleus of an atom is therefore an illusion. 
The relative motion of the nucleus and electrons through space give 
the illusion of circular motion. The period during the formation of 
anti-matter is completely undetectable, since obviously all physical 
matter is manifesting at the same pulse rate, including any instru- 
ments or detectors used to probe atomic structures. 
The period or frequency rate between each pulse of physical matter 
creates the measurement which we call time, as well as the speed 
of light, at the particular position in space of which we are aware, 
at 
any 
given 
moment. 
 
 
(See 
Diagram 
1). 
Note: 
Recent research has indicated that the electron could possibly 
move through 371.27665 degrees. This being the radius multiplied 
by 3.24, which I call spiral Pi. The harmonic of 37127665 would be 
a reciprocal value of that derived from the unified equations. (26934) 
approx. 
If the frequency rate of positive and negative pulses is either 
increased or decreased, then time and the speed of light vary in 
direct proportion. 
10