=== The energy grid - Harmonic 695. The pulse of the universe (Bruce L. Cathie).pdf — CHUNK 7/12 ===
Chars: 43,536 | Offset: 267,293



[PAG 138]
120 
In my earlier books I had shown a position north west of Austin 
which would give a series of grid harmonics. Now, many year 
later, I have access to much more information which enables me to 
calculate a more accurate position, which is displaced only slightly 
from the original. 
The diagram will show that the latitude sets up a harmonic 
geometric which is directly related to twice the speed of light — 288. 
The speed of light in free space being 144,000 minutes of are per 
grid second, relative to the Earth's surface. The speed of light 
according to grid theory, varies from 144,000 minutes of arc per grid 
second in free space, to 143,795.77 minutes of arc per grid second 
at the Earth's surface.   (See my work, "The Bridge to Infinity") 
The great circle distance between the antenna position and lon- 
gitude 180° west, at the same latitude, is 4116.36 minutes of arc. A 
study of all my works will show that the square of this number give 
a harmonic value of 169444. Other sections of my published data  
will show that this harmonic is directly related to mass, gravity and 
communication wavelengths. 
A further, most important, fact is that the great circle distance 
between the antenna position and grid pole "B" in the north is the 
harmonic of twice the speed of light at the Earth's surface or 2875.9 
minutes of arc. Grid Pole "B" is displaced 694.44 minutes of arc 
from the north geographic pole, which is the reciprocal harmonic of 
the speed of light in free space. 
The interaction of all these factors would ensure that all trans- 
missions from the theoretical position would set up unified fields 
harmonized with the geometric structure of matter itself. 
But this is not all. The dimensions of the aerials, the spacing 
and the area covered, are all vital requirements necessary to tune 
our world into the Cosmos. 
The length of each side of the Grid Antenna is: 130.1691208 
minutes of arc, (149.89171 statute miles). Therefore the area cov- 
ered by the grid would be: 16944 square minutes of arc, (or square 
nautical miles). The harmonic of mass, gravity and communication. 
The number of rectangular areas enclosed by the grid antenna, 
not including the centre square, would be 288, the harmonic of 2C, 
where "C" equals the speed of light. 
Each small square section would have a side length of 6.944 
minutes of arc, or nautical miles. This value is the harmonic recip- 
rocal of the speed of light. 6.944 nautical miles is equal to 7.99612 
statute miles (8 miles).

[PAG 139]
121 
So it appears that if the aerials are spaced at 7.9912 statute miles 
and the sides of the square covered by the system are 149.928694 
statute miles long, our aerial would be closely tuned to the structure 
of the Atom. Any signal transmitted by such a system should, in 
theory, 
travel 
a 
great 
distance 
into 
space. 
Hello neighbour. 
Since publication of this chapter the construction of the antenna 
system has become an environmental issue and the project has been 
postponed.    Latest information suggests that the project may be 
shifted to a site near Crystal Falls in Wisconsin.   The given aerial 
length and site position also indicate similar harmonic associations. 
 
 Showing   the  geometric   relationship   of the   underground antenna to 
grid harmonics 
Latitude displacement to north pole     =     59.4° 
Latitude displacement to equator         =    30.6° 
Difference                                          =    28.8° 
Relative displacement    =     288 harmonic - 2C 
Distance A - B    4116.36 minutes of arc. 
This value squared    =     169444 harmonic 
The value 169444 has been found to have connections with the 
harmonics 
of 
mass, 
gravity 
and 
communications. 
The number of rectangular areas enclosed by the grid antenna 
not including the centre square is 288, the harmonic of 2C, where 
C equals the speed of light. The number of amplifiers, shown by 
dots each aerial intersection, is 324. This harmonic is shown in 
variousways throughout the book.   8 x 6.9444 = 55.555.

[PAG 140]
DIAGRAM 11 
 
Showing 
theoretical 
grid 
structure 
of 
underground 
antenna 
for resonating the earth 
Dimensions of grid antenna in minutes of arc: 
(A)   55.555 (55.555 squared = 3086.358025, the reciprocal of 324) 
(B)    130.1691208 
(C)    18.489 
(D)   Centre of grid aerial position 
The square of 130.1691208 is equal to 16944 
122

[PAG 141]
14>   WHERE HAVE ALL THE FLYERS GONE? 
123 
  FIVE DECEMBER, 1945.   A FLIGHT OF FIVE AVENGER 
torpedo-bombers 
of 
the 
United 
States 
Navy 
took 
off 
from 
Fort Lauderdale, Florida, and flew out over a fairly calm sea. 
The weather conditions were clear.   The time was exactly ten min- 
utes past two when the leader roared down the run-way closely 
followed by the four other aircraft in the formation.     Cruising 
off at 215   mph,   the   flight   was   slowly   lost   to   view   as   the 
bombers winged their way out on an easterly course over the 
Antlantic. 
The plan filed by the fight leader showed that the proposed course 
would take the formation 160 miles east towards the Bahamas, then 
north for 40 miles, and then finally back on to a direct course that 
would bring the five aircraft back to the naval air station. In less 
than two hours the flight would be completed, the planes back on 
the ground. 
But those two hours were to drag on into a nightmare for the 
crews of the aircraft, and they were not to see their base again. 
That flight has gone down in the annals of Air Force history as the 
greatest air mystery of our time. 
Word came from the formation at 3:45 p.m. when a strange radio 
message was received in the operations control tower at Fort Lau- 
derdale. The flight leader spoke in a bewildered manner; he was 
obviously worried. He radioed: "We seem to be off course. I'm not 
sure of our position." 
More calls were received over the next hour, and each time the 
leader seemed increasingly at a loss as to what was happening to 
his flight — and as to where it was. 
Around 4 o'clock that strange afternoon a brief radio conversa- 
tion was heard by the listeners in the control tower.    The flight 
leader, by the sound of it, was beginning to panic; he had turned 
over the command to another pilot. The last message from the now 
overdue flight was received at 4:25 p.m. 
"Our position still not certain," the message said. "Believe we are 
about 225 north-east of base." 
With the receipt of this oblique message, a Martin Mariner flying 
boat equipped with rescue and survival equipment was hurriedly

[PAG 142]
124 
made ready and dispatched to the position estimated for the Avengers 
in order to guide them home. Meanwhile, the control tower was 
desperately trying to raise the flight commander, but no more was 
to be heard from him or from any of the other pilots. It was as 
though the flight had never taken place. 
The anxious tower operators then tried to contact the Mariner 
that had been sent off to help the Avengers find their way home. 
There was no response. Communication with all six aircraft was 
lost. 
By now the operations personnel were thoroughly alarmed. The 
coastguard at Miami were contacted, and almost immediately a 
coastguard rescue plane was sent off to follow the path of the other 
aircraft. After a thorough search of the last estimated position the 
coastguard pilot reported back that no sign of the six missing planes 
could be found. 
Surface craft were sent out, and the area was searched through 
out the night. By morning there were twenty vessels methodically 
scouring the sea, and soon they were joined in the air by 240 search 
aircraft, flying in a pattern from Florida to the Bahamas. 
For two days an unceasing search was kept up. The area, scrutini- 
sed by sea and air as it had never been searched before, extended 
up to 300 miles from the coast over the Atlantic, and 200 miles into 
the Gulf of Mexico. 
Not a single trace of the six missing planes was found. The 
search area was then shifted to the inshore areas and around 
the sinister Everglades in the faint hope that the aircraft had. 
for some inexplicable reason, flown inland. Before it was over 
the search operation covered some quarter of a million square miles. 
to become the most intensive air-sea search ever undertaken. But 
the results remained negative. The six aircraft had disappeared 
as though they had vanished from this earth, or into another 
dimension. 
At last, with the search crews exhausted, the Navy reluctantly 
called a halt to the hunt. But search teams continued to rake 
through land areas, the beaches, and the Bahama Islands them 
selves. For weeks all debris cast up on the beaches, every item of 
flotsam, was minutely examined in the dying hope of finding some 
tiny clue, some tiny part of any one of the six missing planes. Nothing 
was found. 
Months 
later 
a 
naval 
board 
of 
inquiry 
formally 
stated 
that 
no trace of the missing planes or their crews had been found, and

[PAG 143]
125 
that no adequate theory could be put forth to explain their 
disappearance. 
An analysis made afterwards to try to determine the most prob- 
able position of the aircraft at the time they disappeared only helped 
to deepen the mystery further. 
Had the flight of Avengers continued on a direct course to the 
east the air-crews would eventually have made contact with Great 
Asaco Island. If they had gone northeast they would have flown 
ever Grand Bahamas Island, which is about twenty-five miles in 
length. Had they continued in a south-easterly direction, they would 
have sighted Andros Island, or any one of a great number of smaller 
islands scattered about that area. In fact, the only completely open 
areas were almost directly north or south, and it is most unlikely 
that either of these courses was followed by the missing six aircraft, 
since they were known to have flown off from the airfield in an 
easterly direction, in accordance with their flight plans. 
At no time did any of the crew members indicate that land 
was within sight in the radio messages received. In other ac- 
counts of this incident it has always emerged that the crews 
were confused and apparently disorientated — almost as though 
they were flying in a void. They seemed not to know whether they 
were flying straight and level or upside down — sea and sky ap- 
peared to be as confused as if the crews had stumbled through 
a hidden doorway and had entered a topsy-turvy world with its 
own rules. 
The only possible explanation seemed to be that for some un- 
known reason the formation had been flying along a circular course 
within the ring of the surrounding islands; otherwise, it was ar- 
gued, at some stage they would surely have sighted land. 
Since there were five aircraft in the missing formation, the chances 
off the navigation equipment in every one of them being faulty were 
so remote as to be an impossibility.   All equipment had been thor- 
oughly checked out and passed as fully servicable before the exer- 
else. In the event of any disaster, of whatever nature, at least one 
of the five aircraft would have had time to send out a distress 
signal. All aircraft and crew were equipped with survival gear for 
use in the event of a crash landing or an enforced ditching in the 
sea. The same thing was true of the missing Martin Mariner. 
Moreover, this particular aircraft was bulging with survival equip- 
ment. If all six aircraft had crashed somewhere, or gone into 
the water, some trace, some item of wreckage, would eventually

[PAG 144]
126 
have been picked up.   Yet nothing has ever turned up — not the 
tiniest trace. 
The records of the incident are still open, and to this day no 
logical explanation has ever been put forward to account for the 
mysterious events of that December day. 
In my earlier publication Harmonic 695, I had put forth the 
theory that the aircraft had flown into an area of space-time insta- 
bility due to the partial destruction of the world grid, in ancient 
times. Now that I am aware that the grid system is a natural 
manifestation due to the formation of matter itself, I have checked 
the known facts once again and estimated the flight path by com- 
puter analysis. 
At the time of my earlier findings I did not believe that our own 
scientists had the knowledge to set up any type of experiment which 
could have had any effect, what-so-ever, on the flight of the Avengers; 
so the disappearance was thought to be caused by forces beyond 
our control. 
Now, many years later, the evidence at hand indicates, without 
much doubt, that the scientists did have a great deal of theoretical 
knowledge concerning the structure of space- time and that various 
experiments were being carried out in order to verify the unified 
nature of our reality. 
The flight plan filed by the flight leader, on close analysis by 
computer, now reveals a strong possibility that the Avengers were 
part of an advanced scientific experiment, set up by our own scien- 
tists. If this were so, then the crews of the aircraft were probably 
not aware of it. If anything went wrong, or, if indeed the experi- 
ment was a success, they would, under the circumstances, be deemed 
expendable. The fact that the radio transmissions from the aircraft 
gave no indication that the crew members were aware of the cause 
of their predicament suggest that the experiment, if it took place, 
was known only to those who set it up. 
The filed flight plan showed the following possibilities: 
The proposed course would take the formation 160 miles east 
towards Great Abaco Island, then north for 40 miles and then fi- 
nally back onto a direct course that should take them to the Naval 
air station. 
If we take these coordinates and transpose them into very close 
grid 
equivalents 
of 
minutes 
of 
arc, 
or 
nautical 
miles, 
then: 
160 
statute 
miles 
(flight 
plan) 
could 
be: 
159.93256 Statute miles (grid)

[PAG 145]
127 
Which converts to: 
138.8888 nautical miles (minutes) grid 
Which is equal to: 
(69.4444 x 2) or twice the speed of light reciprocal 
harmonic (694444). 
40 statute miles (flight plan) 
Could be: 
39.983139 statute miles (grid) 
Which converts to: 
34.7222 nautical miles (minutes) grid 
Which is equal to: 
(69.4444/2) or half the speed of light reciprocal 
harmonic       (347222). 
The return, or third, leg of the journey would equal: 
165.583 statute miles. 
Which converts to: 
 143.79577 nautical miles (minutes) grid. 
The speed of light at the Earth's surface (average) is: 143,795.77 
minutes of arc per grid second. 
A glance at diagram 12 will show that the filed flight plan closely 
fits the theoretical flight plan which allows direct association with 
the harmonics of the unified field. 
In the diagram (A) represents the take-off point at Fort Lauder- 
dale, (B) the turning point near Gorda Cay and (C) the turning 
point for home, near the Downer Cays.   At the first turning point 
(B) the aircraft would be at a distance of 3229.8793 minutes of arc 
from north grid pole(B). 
This converts to: 
53.8313 degrees. 
The Cosine of this angle equals: 
0.59016475 
The reciprocal of this value equals: 
1.69444 (harmonic 169444) 
This harmonic is associated with mass and gravity. If, at the 
time the aircraft reached these turning points, a pulsed harmonic 
transmission was broadcast from a strategically placed ground sta- 
tion, or stations, it is possible that a unified field effect could have 
been caused at these positions. It is also possible that advanced 
electronic equipment could have been placed in the aircraft without 
the knowledge of the crews. 
Admittedly the theory is pure speculation but the flight plan fits

[PAG 146]
and I have a feeling that this is more than just coincidence. As I 
said in my initial publication, I believe that all the aircraft were 
completely disintegrated, or moved through space-time. 
Where, may we ask, have all the flyers gone? Do they still exist 
in some kind of space warp?   Were our own people responsible? 
128

[PAG 147]
MAP 6 
Map showing estimated, intended, flight path of five Avenger aircraft 
from Fort Lauderdale on December 5th, 1945

[PAG 149]
15>PEOPLE WE WOULD LIKE TO KNOW MORE   ABOUT 
131 
STARTLING THOUGH IT WAS TO HAVE FOUND A 
network of man-made aerials built into the UFO grid system, 
some of the subsequent events were bizarre. 
Up to this time I had been aware of treading on the corns of a 
few faceless technicians and other parties who had some connection, 
scienfically or politically, with the UFO grid. It had to be only a 
matter of of time before the corns were inflamed enough to bring their 
possessors out into the open. So far as I was aware, no direct action 
had been taken to prevent me from proceeding with investigations 
connected with my theories, or to try and stop my constant probing 
into the network. 
Like all the best ordered secret societies, the group had given no 
positive indication that they even existed. So long as the public at 
large did not insist upon answers to controversial questions, the 
group's members, whoever and wherever they were, were appar- 
ently content to let matters quietly take their own course, no doubt 
hopeful that eventually I would be branded as just another crank, 
and that anything I had to put forward would automatically 
be discounted. 
I was fully aware that there was a possibility that I would be 
written off as a crank, but I soon decided that this was a chance I 
would have to take anyway. Obviously I had to be fairly careful 
how I handled information I was now receiving. If I pushed too 
hard, I would almost certainly be regarded as a Grade A lunatic, 
On the other hand, if I kept all the information to myself I would 
lose any advantage I might have gained, and I would be placing 
myself in a position that could prove to be quite dangerous. Other 
investigators of UFO phenomena in the past have disappeared or 
have been victims of strange accidents as a result of probing too 
deeply into the so-called flying saucer enigma. 
For these reasons I decided that my best course was to leak in- 
formation out as it came into my hands, and also to filter out copies 
of all my notes through a loose-knit chain of contacts both within 
and outside New Zealand, so that it would be impossible to stop the

[PAG 150]
132 
truth from spreading. All the evidence so far gathered would be in 
the hands of certain newspapermen, so that it could be transmitted 
via the wire services immediately any move was made to stop my 
investigations. 
I had no intention of becoming involved in some weird cloak and 
dagger game; certainly I have never regarded my investigations as 
either a game or a harmless hobby. I am also deeply aware of just 
how serious the "group" is about maintaining secrecy over their 
activities. 
In fact, I took some pains to keep the "group" informed about the 
network I had set up to ensure that all information would quickly 
be disseminated in the event of some untoward accident coming my 
way. There were a few people whom I was certain had direct con- 
nections with the "group," if they were not members themselves. 
Through these people I let the word go out as to the precautions I 
had taken. One of them scornfully suggested that he could not 
believe any journalist would sit on such hot news when it might be 
possible for him to get a scoop on the news services of the world. 
My answer to him was: "Test the truth of what I have told you by 
trying to stop me in my investigations." So far the test has not been 
made; perhaps he realised that after all there are more honest and 
dedicated men in this world than we sometimes think. 
At any rate the scheme appeared to be working very well; I found 
that the public, instead of labelling me as crazy, with first-class 
honours, actively encouraged my research into the UFO mystery. 
Letters came every day, from many parts of the world, after the 
publication of Harmonic 33. The majority of them enclosed useful 
information or offered further suggestions for lines of investigation. 
Only rarely did a letter turn up in my box that assassinated my 
character or intimated that I was off my trolley. It was clear that 
a large slice of the reading public knew that there had been some 
thing going on which they were not being properly informed about 
On reflection I think it was this flood of encouragement that came 
through my post box, more than anything else, that drove me on 
with my investigations. By nature I have a strong streak of curi- 
osity; but it helps a lot more than I can estimate to find that there 
are many other people around who are anxious to help in any way 
they can. 
When we photographed the first radio transmitter which I found 
to have a connection with the UFO grid, though, our "opposition" 
must have blown their cool. We had made ten prints of the photos

[PAG 151]
133 
and these were in my possession when, a few days later, I was 
scheduled to carry out an airways flight to New Zealand's South 
Island. On the night of 16 March 1968, I was to stop over in the 
capital, Wellington, and on the next day, fly on to Invercargill, New 
Zealand's southernmost city, returning the following day (18 March) 
via various centres throughout the country. I was well aware of the 
significance of the photographs we had taken, and I considered it 
unsafe to leave them at my home while I was absent. 
I had stowed them into my airways brief bag, and during my stay 
in Wellington I contacted the American Embassy's air attache.   I 
had told him the whole story, stressing that the photographs were 
in my possession. Until this time, in fact, I had passed a great deal 
of information to the Americans by way of the Embassy. There had 
been five personal discussions with the air attache at his office in 
Wellington up to this time. At first I had thought that the Em- 
bassy's interest in my research was because I had found something 
new. As time went by I realised that this was not the case. On the 
contrary, it soon became clear to me that the scientists were well 
ahead of anything that I had been able to discover. So the Em- 
bassy's interest was more in order to keep tabs on what I might be 
finding — and to see if I did happen to come upon something that 
the scientists did not already know. 
I was content to go along with this situation because I believed 
that, everything I did, discovered or theorised should be kept in the 
open. If, on the other hand, the Americans or anyone else wanted 
to keep their findings a secret — well, that was their business. I felt 
that once it was known that I had acquired a certain level of knowledge 
they would have to admit something of the state of their own re- 
search, even if to do so was only in an attempt to dissuade me from 
continuing my own line of research. 
The air attache in fact turned out to be a valuable source of 
information, help and encouragement. It was he who assured me 
that my calculation of the UFO grid pattern for the global system 
was correct. Among other items he passed on to me: intensive UFO 
research was being carried out at Wright Patterson Airfield in the 
United States. The scientific laboratory there, set up for the pur- 
pose, was described as a complex of buildings covering a large area 
and staffed by many of the world's top scientists. Experimental 
work was carried out twenty-four hours a day, 365 days a year. At 
one stage the official asked me if I would consider a trip to America 
to visit this base.   Naturally I said I would — any time they cared

[PAG 152]
134 
to put out an invitation. Perhaps the idea was vetoed in the States, 
for I heard no more of this. In retrospect it seems to me that al- 
though at that time I was in the very early stages of my UFO 
research, perhaps I had already stumbled on to something that was 
of deep interest to the American scientists. They must have realised 
that I was beginning to uncover information which they themselves 
had kept carefully hidden from the general public for many years 
The following night after this visit to Wellington, having takes 
pains to inform my Embassy contact that I had the photographs of 
a transmitter with me, I stayed at the Grand Hotel in Invercargill 
What took place there that night convinced me that there were 
other people in New Zealand besides myself who were keenly inter- 
ested in our camera work. They are some of the people I would like 
to know more about. 
After a leisurely dinner my co-pilot and I retired to the lounge for 
a chat and a cup of coffee. On this particular night there were two 
complete aircrews staying at the Grand. Members of the other crew 
were based in Wellington, and for some reason, which is still a 
mystery to me, the rostering section of the airline had switched the 
Wellington co-pilot on to my flight for the next day, while my Auck- 
land co-pilot was to return with the Wellington crew on the early 
morning flight. We were not informed of this switch until after we 
had arrived in Invercargill earlier that afternoon. The co-pilot origi- 
nally with me was most upset over this, as it interfered with some 
of his personal arrangements and also meant his getting up very 
early the following morning. 
To verify the situation I telephoned Wellington and was told that 
the Wellington co-pilot was to crew the flight with me as far as the 
capital, while another Auckland co-pilot would carry on from there 
back to Auckland with me. I thought the whole thing rather odd 
it meant that three crew members would be chopping and changing 
to do the work of two men. However, it was not really my concern 
so I okayed the change and told my original co-pilot of his tough 
luck. 
The Wellington co-pilot chatting with me over coffee in the Grand's 
lounge had been interested in my research, he said; so I brought our 
the photos of the aerial from the bag in my room to show him 
Before he joined the airline as a pilot, this man had been associated 
with the DSIR (Department of Scientific and Industrial Research), 
and had carried out duties in the radio research division at Me 
Murdo Sound, in the Antarctic.   I though he might be able to tell

[PAG 153]
135 
me what range of frequencies the aerial arrangement in the photo- 
graphs might be operating on. 
We were soon deep into a discussion on this point. He tried to 
persuade me that the aerial was a completely mundane affair, in 
common use among ham operators for normal transmissions. Sud- 
denly we were interrupted by a tall, conservatively dressed man 
who had wandered over from the company of two similarly attired 
gentlemen sitting around a table some distance away from us, at the 
centre of the lounge. 
Just before the stranger came to a halt at our table I had slipped 
the photographs back into their large envelope, and this was now 
resting on my lap, so I'm sure he was unable, at any time, to see 
that 
the 
photographs 
were 
related 
to 
broadcasting 
equipment. 
Moreover, the table at which he had left his two friends was quite 
some distance away, and certainly he would have been out of 
carshot. 
He asked me if we were talking about duck-shooting, and if we 
were interested in that sport? Somewhat non-plussed at this gambit, 
I told him we had no interest in ducks or any other kind of sporting 
birds, and that we were in Invercargill for reasons quite uncon- 
nected with shooting. 
Then I asked him if he was staying in the hotel.   He said that 
he was; he had, he said, a farm some miles distant from Invercar- 
gill, and he and his wife (of whom there was no sign) were in town 
to celebrate their wedding anniversary.   This certainly seemed odd 
to me, and the sensation I was experiencing that this was no ordi- 
nary, casual hotel lounge encounter increased when the stranger 
drew up a chair and sat down with us, intent on carrying the con- 
versation on for some time. I studied him more closely: he was aged 
between forty-five and fifty; over six feet tall and well built, al- 
though rather slim for his height.  His features were on the rugged 
side, and his face roundish; a small fold of skin under the lower lip 
gave one an impression that at some time he might have been in a 
minor accident or suffered facial burns that required slight surgery. 
His hair was dark, slightly greyed, and thinning; his eyes light 
coloured and conveying an impression of considerable intelligence. 
His hands were long-fingered and strong, but not as rough as one 
would expect in a farmer.   He wore a dark suit and black shoes. 
The suit was of conservative cut, well tailored though from a material 
I would describe as coarse, almost cheap.   Perhaps this was one of 
the factors that made me feel he was odd.

[PAG 154]
136 
After talking for a while about ducks he suddenly switched the 
conversation on to an entirely different channel. He asked if we 
were interested in ham radio or radio stations. 
Trying not to show my surprise I told him we were not particu- 
larly interested; privately, I began to wonder how I could get rid of 
him without being obviously rude. He continued to insist that we 
must be interested in radio; he said he had a friend not far out of 
town who had a ham radio set-up, and if we were to go with him 
we would be very intrigued with the equipment. I tried to tell him 
that we were not very interested in radio, and that as it was now 
after nine o'clock we certainly did not feel like taking a trip out of 
town to see a ham operators gear. He then countered with the 
information that he knew someone in a local government radio station, 
and would we care to go with him to meet his friend there and 
discuss radio matters with him? 
By this time my co-pilot was looking distinctly uneasy; suddenly 
he stood up and excused himself, disappearing into the TV lounge. 
This left me alone with the stranger, wondering how best I could 
get rid of him without making a scene about it, and at the same 
time getting my envelope of precious photographs into a safe place. 
Finally I made it clear to him that I was not prepared to leave the 
hotel, for any reason. He at once asked me to write down the name 
of his friend at the government radio station on the envelope on my 
lap so that I could visit him next time I found myself in Invercargill 
with nothing better to do. It seemed to me that he wanted to put 
a name on the envelope so that he would be able to claim it as his, 
if somehow he could get possession of it. Needless to say I kept a 
firm hand on the envelope as he talked on. 
From the conversation that followed I gathered that on the pre- 
vious evening he had been aboard an American ship which was in 
the port at Bluff, and had had a few drinks with the captain in his 
cabin. He hinted that if I were interested I could go with him now 
to visit the ship. He did not explain how he had met the American 
captain, or how he had managed to get aboard the ship. This 
omission added to my suspicions, and I made up my mind to get rid 
of him. 
I stood up rather abruptly and excused myself, saying that I had 
some urgent business to attend to, and made to walk away. He 
became apologetic, and did his best to keep me talking; he said he 
hoped he had not embarrassed me or my friend in any way. I left 
him then, and walked through the lounge past his two friends, who

[PAG 155]
137 
were still sitting at their table, downstairs to the main office. His 
two companions looked like businessmen; they had been keeping an 
eye on us all this time. 
At the office downstairs I asked the receptionist for some Scotch 
tape and with it I firmly sealed the envelope, the photographs se- 
surely inside it, writing my name boldly on the front and back I 
had the receptionist place it in the hotel's safe, explaining that I 
would 
pick 
it 
up 
just 
before 
I 
left 
the 
following 
day. 
The task completed, I went back upstairs and let myself into a 
public telephone box at the top of the stairs, just outside the en- 
trance to the main lounge and the smaller TV room. I put through 
a toll call to Auckland and spoke to my wife. I told her some of the 
odd events of the night, and asked if she had been disturbed. She 
told me that some friends of ours were with her, and that nothing 
unusual had happened. Immediately after this brief conversation I 
went into the TV lounge to talk to my co-pilot. He told me that the 
three strangers had left a short time before by the stairway to the 
ground floor and the main entrance of the hotel. 
Back down the stairs I went to ask the receptionist who the three 
men were who had just left, to ask whether they were staying in the 
hotel. All I got was a blank look. Who was I referring to? There 
were no men of that description staying in the hotel; she had been 
at the desk the whole time; no one had passed her office, no one had 
gone out of the main doors, in full view of her desk and less than 
ten feet away.   Anyone leaving by the stairs from the first floor 
would have had to leave by those doors.   There was no other exit. 
Doors leading into the bars at the back of the ground floor were 
locked at this time of night.  The only other means of egress would 
be from the first floor upward, by means of the fire escapes. 
I was beginning to feel as confused as the girl was looking.   I 
went back up the stairs once more, and asked my co-pilot if he were 
quite certain that the men had left by the main stairs.   From his 
seat he could see the top of the staircase quite clearly, and he con- 
firmed that they must have left by the main entrance just a short 
time before. 
How had they come into the hotel — and how did they leave? 
How did they pass in front of a receptionist without being seen? 
Who were they? And what were they after?  I am positive that our 
darkly-clad friend was no more a local farmer than I am. I still won- 
der, frequently, what would have happened if I had left with them, 
and taken that offered trip to the radio station outside of the city.

[PAG 156]
138 
A few days later I was again passing through Wellington. I con- 
tacted the United States Embassy and told the air attache of the 
incident. I added that I was aware that I was being kept under 
observation, and that if any of the people who contacted me went 
overseas agents my advice to him was to see to it that they stopped 
bothering me. The New Zealand Government at this time was fully 
aware of my activities, and had given me written approval of my 
research. If anyone caused me trouble, I told him, I would imme- 
diately make known all the facts, the evidence, the theories — ev- 
erything I had put together so far. 
The attache" was sympathetic, and asked for more details about 
my encounter with the three strangers in Invercargill. Later on he 
confirmed that an American training ship had been at Bluff over 
the period I was there, but no more information than that was 
forthcoming. 
The three men were not New Zealanders, I'm sure; wherever 
they were from, though, remains their secret. 
During an operational flying period it is necessary each day to 
have a full crew on stand-by-duties at the airfield to allow for un- 
forseen crew changes due to sickness or accidents. One morning in 
February, 1969, I was carrying out a four-hour stretch of one of 
these duties. Over morning tea with some other crew members in 
the upstairs cafeteria of the Mangere Airport, Auckland, terminal 
building, I was the victim of another odd occurrence. 
Not far away from where we sat, at another table, was an unusual 
looking couple busily examining an expensive camera, laughing over 
its mysteries like a pair of children. At first I gave them little more 
than a casual glance, and was half-turned away from them, talking 
to a captain having a quick coffee before flying an airliner south to 
Wellington. 
After some moments of conversation I turned round, for some 
reason I have never been able to fathom, to look directly at the two 
who were still fussing over their camera. At the precise instant that 
I turned to face them the man raised the camera, aimed it at me 
and took a photograph. Then, just as quickly, he continued to 
fumble with the instrument and turned it back to his companion as 
if the incident had never occurred — perhaps hoping that I had 
noticed nothing. 
I was so surprised by this action that I was at a complete loss a 
to what I should do. After all, there was nothing particularly sin- 
ister about the event. He could have been a collector of photographs

[PAG 157]
139 
of airline pilots, for all I was to know.   Somewhat embarrassed I 
turned back and resumed the conversation with the other skipper, 
at the same time wondering why a complete stranger would want 
to lake my photograph. 
They were certainly an uncommon-looking couple. He was a tall, 
gangling sort of individual, with thin, pipe-stem limbs. His most 
startling feature was his head: it was almost perfectly spherical, 
and it was as bare of hair as a billiard ball. The skin was a golden- 
tan colour, and very smooth; the colour was as I imagine that of an 
American Indian to be. I imagined that he would never have any 
need to shave. Not only was his head round, it was small in pro- 
portion to the rest of his body. He was dressed in light coloured 
slacks, and a bright reddish short-sleeved open neck shirt. In spite 
of his thin body he looked to me to be very fit and agile. 
She was the exact antithesis of her friend; although slender, she 
was shorter than he; her features were long, almost aquiline.   She 
wore her jet-black hair long, down over her shoulders in an old- 
fashioned style.   Her eyes were very dark and large, and accentu- 
ated by a very pale, almost pallid, skin.   She wore a dark, simple 
skirt and blouse.   She was an unusual-looking person, but in her 
way attractive, although in a crowd she would certainly not attract 
as much attention as her companion. 
I judged both of them to be in their early twenties. They looked 
friendly enough, one might even say jovial; whatever their business, 
I cannot say there was at any time anything suggestive of sinister 
intent about them. 
But they worried me.   And when I returned to the crewroom 
some five minutes later, leaving them still engrossed in animated 
conversation at their table, I couldn't stop wondering who they were. 
After a few moments my curiosity got the better of me. I decided 
to go back upstairs and have another good look at them, and, if 
possible, talk to them.    I went out of the Operation Room door, 
which is in a corner of the main foyer of the terminal building, and 
pushed my way into the crowd milling about the nearby ticket counters, 
heading for the flight of stairs some twenty yards away.  I had only 
gone a short distance through the crowd when I nearly bumped into 
the tall stranger, who was striding in my direction.   We gave each 
other a surprised look; and then, like a startled rabbit, he turned 
about and scuttled off through the crowd, to disappear into the far 
end of the building. This second encounter took only a few seconds, 
and I had no chance of catching up with him without causing some

[PAG 158]
140 
sort of disturbance. Besides, I had no real reason for pursuing him, 
he had done me no harm — at least, none that I knew of. 
The next best thing to do, I decided, was to have another look 
upstairs to see if his companion was still sitting there. If she were 
no doubt he would soon be rejoining her. However, upstairs there 
was no sign of her. Like her friend, she had disappeared. After 
waiting for a few minutes I went back to the crewroom. 
It was on the face of it a quite trivial incident. Most people 
would have forgotten it within a few days. Yet even now, quite 
some time after, I find that the whole thing is still vividly etched on 
my mind. I'm intrigued by the questions they brought into my life 
Who were they? What were they up to? Why did the man take my 
photograph? Why did he run off, looking so very startled, when we 
met in the crowd?   And where were they from? 
Until now I have found no real evidence to support the popular 
belief that aliens from another world are walking in out midst. 
Over the years there have been many stories and some striking 
accounts of contact between humans and non-humans. Logic tells 
us that with all the evidence that there now exists pointing to sus- 
tained contact by scientists of this planet with beings connected 
with the UFOs that visit our skies, there has to be direct commu- 
nication between humans and aliens at some level. It follows that 
there is every likelihood for aliens to be among us. 
If it turns out that there are indeed aliens here already, I would 
in no way be disconcerted to discover that the odd couple I encoun- 
tered in the Mangere Airport cafeteria are among their representa- 
tives. 
And if by some chance the round-headed gentleman who took a 
photograph of me, or his companion, should chance to read this, 
here is a message: I hope you will contact me and satisfy my curi- 
osity. Why did you take my photograph? And what have you done 
with it?

[PAG 159]
16> 
 
 
THE 
SECRET 
OF 
LIFE 
(LAKHOVSKY) 
AND 
DELAND'S MAGNETIC CANOPY 
141 
IN MY EARLIER PUBLICATIONS, I DESCRIBED A TYPE 
of ground aerial system being used in many orchards in the 
United States. The apparatus has proved to be very successful 
in warding off frost damage to citrus fruit. A further effect has been 
the promoting of healthier trees and better general growth in the 
areas covered. 
I gave dimensions for a similar aerial which would resonate at 
the frequencies of light and gravity. Since publication I have re- 
ceived more information on the American system and have been 
extremely interested in the actual dimensions used. 
The aerial was designed by John Delrea Deland of Riverside, 
California, and has been in use since 1949. The units cover about 
one acre each and consist of a steel mast about 32 feet high, made 
of galvanised pipe in 12-foot lengths. The first is a two-inch pipe set 
into a three-foot-deep concrete base. Two other pipes of lesser diameter 
are screwed on to the bottom pipe to form a vertical mast 30-feet 
high. At the masthead, and also at the two pipe joints, a water- 
proof, three-quarter inch plywood disc is fitted. At the outer edge 
of the discs are seven drilled holes, evenly spaced and parallel to the 
mast.   The holes are about 1/4 inch diameter, 51.42857° apart. 
Ten hard copper wires are strung through each of the holes in 
the discs, parallel with the mast.    At the top disc the wires are 
extended about eight inches parallel to the earth. This forms a wire 
cage around the mast. The wires pass through the outer edge of the 
concrete base then into trenches which are 18 inches deep and 
radiate from the mast centre at angles of 51.42857°.    One of the 
wires in the trench must be orientated with magnetic north. 
The wires are run from the centre of the mast to a distance of 
144 feet.   They are then attached to a "magnetic pack" the design 
of which, according to the information I have, is a secret. The 
end of each wire is then brought above ground and pointed to- 
ward   its   corresponding   end   at   the   top   of  the   mast.      The 
trenches, which form the radius of a circle 288 feet in diameter, are 
then covered in.