=== The energy grid - Harmonic 695. The pulse of the universe (Bruce L. Cathie).pdf — CHUNK 2/12 ===
Chars: 43,875 | Offset: 44,364



[PAG 29]
DIAGRAM 1 
 
Formation 
of 
matter 
and 
anti-matter 
in 
alternate 
positive 
and 
negative cycles. The frequency rate between each pulse of physical 
matter determines the rate of flow of time, and the speed of 
light, at any particular point in space. 
The 
path 
of 
the 
nucleus 
through 
space 
would 
also 
be 
a 
spiral, but for the sake of simplicity it has been shown as a 
straight line in this diagram. 
This concept would explain time as a geometric, as Einstein 
theorised it to be. 
A rough analogy of physical existence can be made by reference 
to a strip of motion picture film. Each frame or static picture on the 
film strip may be likened to a single pulse of physical existence. 
The division between one frame and the next represents a pulse of 
anti-matter. When viewed as a complete strip, each frame would be 
seen as a static picture and, in a sense, by comparing two of these 
static pictures — say one at either end of the strip — then the past 
and the future can be viewed simultaneously. However, when the 
film is fed through a projector, we obtain the illusion of motion and 
the passage of time. The divisions between the static pictures are 
not detected by our senses because of the frequency, or speed, of 
each projection on the movie screen. But by speeding up or slowing 
down the projector, we can alter the apparent time rate of the ac- 
tions shown by the film.

[PAG 30]
To continue this analogy: our consciousness is the projector. The 
conscious "I am" part of our individuality passes from one pulse of 
physical matter to the next within the framework of the physical 
structure which we term our body, thus giving the illusion of con- 
stant reality, and the passing of time. 
It is logical to assume that we have a twin stream of conscious- 
ness on the anti-matter side of the cycle, which in fact creates a 
mirror-image of our own individual personality. (This postulate has 
already been put forward by scientists.) The frequency of manifes- 
tation of both streams of consciousness, that is, the plus and the 
minus "I am" would position our awareness of the illusion of reality 
at a particular point in space and time. In other words, if the 
frequency of pulse manifestation is altered, even fractionally, our 
awareness of reality, in the physical sense, will shift from one spatial 
point to another. In fact, we would travel from one point in space 
to another without being aware that we had traversed distance in 
the physical sense.   This would be space travel in the truest sense. 
Let's look at another analogy: we can consider a simple spiral 
spring as representing the wave motion of an electron through space. 
Every second 360° spiral of the spring represents the path of the 
electron in physical matter, while the opposite applies to anti-mat- 
ter. 
The theory outlined above explains why light has been described 
as being caused by both a wave motion and a pulse. Both explana- 
tions are correct. 
A pulse of light is manifested when the energy level of the atomic 
structure is altered by outside influences (theory of Max Planck). In 
the physical plane, the electron of the atomic structure appears to 
jump from its orbit. According to my belief, the electron does not 
jump orbit. But this is the illusion we obtain, since we are not 
equipped to perceive the path of the electron during the anti-matter 
cycle. What actually happens is that the radius of the spiralling 
motion is increased or decreased in order to absorb or release the 
energy imparted to, or removed from, the atomic structure. If the 
energy is imparted, then the electron must extend orbit in order to 
maintain balance in the system; and vice versa. Light, or any other 
radiant energy above or below light frequency, is therefore mani- 
fested by undetectable changes in the radius of the spiral motion of 
the electron during the anti-matter cycle. 
If this hypothesis is correct, movement from one point in space 
to another point, regardless of apparent distance — in other words,

[PAG 31]
true space travel — is completely feasible. By manipulating the 
frequency rate of the matter-anti-matter cycle, the time and speed 
of light can be varied in direct proportion to any desired value. 
This, I believe, is the method of propulsion used by UFOs, and 
it is at the core of the theory upon which I have constructed the 
global UFO grid system. 
This is the basis. I am aware that considerable refinement will 
have to be undertaken. But I believe that the completed concept 
will be quite simple. As our technocracy advances, you will find 
from a casual examination of many examples (printed circuits, for 
example) that equipment and apparatus become simplified rather 
than more complex. 
And now, to round off this section of my mathematical theories, 
n word or two about the equation which I believe will set up a 
reaction in space-time. 
 
The classical Einstein equation is contained in this, but the speed 
of 
light 
factor, 
C, 
has 
been 
doubled. 
Furthermore: 
 is equal to M, or the volume or mass of any 
unit body in space. 
By calculation of the diameter of any spherical mass and the rate 
of its rotation, the value of the speed of light, time and gravity 
accelerations should be capable of being determined. If the volume 
of irregular bodies can be determined, then by calculation of the 
equivalent spherical volume the other values can also be deter- 
mined. 
There is a corollary: the linear speed of light in any particular 
point in space determines the volume of the body precipitated at 
that point. Therefore, relative to earth values of light, a lesser 
speed will determine smaller masses, and larger speeds will deter- 
mine larger masses — such as that of Jupiter, for example. The 
angular acceleration of light will remain constant. 
Corollary: for any unit body, once precipitated, then the rate of 
rotation, or spin, and its volume will directly determine its rate of 
acceleration in space (i.e., its movement in space relative to other 
13

[PAG 32]
14 
bodies). This movement will maintain a constant balance of the 
angular acceleration of light at the point in space in which the body 
may be at any given instant. 
If these theories seem to be complex and abstruse, bear with us. 
They are presented here as a means of establishing the foundation 
of other theories in support of which evidence will be offered.

[PAG 33]
2>   MATHEMATICS OF THE WORLD GRID 
MY 
INTEREST 
IN 
THE 
INCREASING 
UFO 
ACTIVITY 
in the New Zealand area led me to the discovery that the 
surface 
of 
the 
world 
was 
crisscrossed 
with 
an 
intricate 
network of energy grid lines.   I began my research in 1965. 
In a general way I was convinced that UFOs were actively engaged 
in a survey of the earth for some definite reason. I felt that their 
visits were not haphazard; they were not just on casual sightseeing 
tours.  Quite a number of investigators around the world had come 
to the conclusion that the sightings were beginning to form a pat- 
tern.   At this period, however, this pattern was so complex as to 
defy any definition, or solution.    By the correlation of sightings 
small sections of track had been identified, and some saucers had 
been seen moving along these set paths. Some of these had hovered 
over certain spots at set intervals. But these bits and pieces of 
tracklines were so scattered around the surface of our planet that 
It was quite impossible to fit them together into any semblance of 
order. 
I was certain that if an overall pattern could be found and plot- 
ted, it might be possible to establish the reason behind UFO activ- 
ity. I considered that the pattern would be geometric if these things 
were intelligently controlled, and that if somehow I could find the 
key to one section then I might solve the rest by duplication and 
Inference. I had sighted a number of unidentified objects in the sky 
over a period of several years, and by correlating two of these with 
other data, I was eventually able to construct a grid system which 
covered the whole world. 
One of these sightings was in 1956. I was a DC3 co-pilot crewing 
a flight from Auckland to Paraparaumu. It was about 6pm, condi- 
tions were calm, and there was unlimited visibility. We were just 
south of Waverley at 7000 feet when I saw this object at an ex- 
tremely high altitude in the east. I drew the captain's attention to 
it and together we watched it travel in a curved trajectory from east 
to west across our track until it disappeared in a flash of light at 
about 10,000 feet in the area of D'Urville Island. It appeared to 
travel across New Zealand in the vicinity, or slightly to the north, 
of Cook Strait, and it was so large that two streaks, similar to 
15

[PAG 34]
vapour trails, were seen to extend from either side of its pale 
green disc. 
When about halfway across the Strait a small object detached 
itself from the parent body and dropped vertically until it disap- 
peared. It looked almost as if the main disc was at such a high 
temperature that a globule had dripped from it. I thought about 
this later and decided that if that were so, the small object would 
also have a curved trajectory in the direction of the parent body. 
But this was not so; it detached and dropped vertically down at 
great speed. There could be only one answer from this action: the 
small body must have been controlled. 
Calculations at a later date proved this UFO to have been be- 
tween 1500-2000 feet in diameter. A report in a Nelson newspaper 
on the following day described an explosion at a high altitude to the 
north of the city. The shock-wave broke windows in some local 
glasshouses. 
The other sighting occurred on 12 March 1965. This was the 
best and most interesting of them all, and from then my investiga- 
tions were pressed on with all speed until they culminated in my 
present findings. 
I had always expected to see UFOs in the sky, and that was 
where my attention was usually focussed. When I was flying I was 
alert and ready to analyse any object sighted from the aircraft. I 
never expected to find a saucer landing at my feet and so far this 
has never happened. This sighting however was different from all 
the others because I observed it lying under thirty feet of water. 
I was scheduled to carry out a positioning flight from When- 
uapai, Auckland's main airport at that time, to Kaitaia. Departure 
was at 11 am and as no passengers were involved and the weather 
was perfect, I decided to fly visually to Kaitaia along the west coast. 
An officer from the operations department was on board and this 
was a good opportunity to show him some of the rugged country to 
the north. (I must stress that air-traffic regulations were strictly 
observed during the flight.) 
On leaving Whenuapai I climbed to clear the area and when 
approaching the southern end of the Kaipara Harbour, just north of 
Helensville, I dropped to a lower altitude to have a better look at 
anything in the flight path. The tide in the Harbour was well out, 
and the water over the mudflats and estuaries was quite shallow. 
I suppose we were about a third of the way across the harbour 
when I spotted what I took to be a stranded grey-white whale.   I 
16

[PAG 35]
veered slightly to port, to fly more directly over the object and to 
obtain a better look. 
I suppose a pilot develops the habit of keeping his emotions to 
himself. As far as I can remember I gave no indication of surprise, 
and I said nothing as I looked down. My "whale" was definitely a 
metal fish.   I could see it very clearly, and I quote from the notes 
I made later. 
A.  The object was perfectly streamlined and symmetrical in shape. 
B.  It had no external control surfaces or protrusions. 
C.  It appeared metallic, and there was a suggestion of a hatch on 
top, streamlined in shape. It was not quite halfway along the 
body as measured from the nose. 
D). It was resting on the bottom of the estuary and headed to- 
wards the south, as suggested from the streamlined shape. 
E. The shape was not that of a normal submarine and there was 
no superstructure. 
F.  I estimated the length as 100 feet, with a diameter of 15 feet 
at the widest part. 
G.  The object rested in no more than 30 feet of clear water. The 
bottom of the harbour was visible and the craft was sharply 
defined. 
Inquiries made from the navy confirmed that it would not have 
been possible for a normal submarine to be in this particular posi- 
tion, due to the configuration of the harbour and coastline. 
The chief engineer of the Ministry of Works, Auckland, checked 
this spot on the harbour with a depth-sounder in September 1969. 
He informed me afterwards that a hole had been detected in the 
harbour bed approximately one eight of a mile wide and over 100 
feet deep, which I consider would indicate that some activity had 
been carried out in this position some five years previously. (See 
photocopy of the report — page 246). 
I had a further key to the puzzle in April 1965. My wife saw an 
advertisement in the local paper seeking members for a UFO 
organisation called New Zealand Scientific and Space Research. I 
contacted this organisation and found that a vast amount of infor- 
mation had been very efficiently compiled. Material had been col- 
lected from twenty-five different countries over a period of twelve 
years.   I was invited to study the information at leisure. 
Amongst this mass of data I discovered the reports of a UFO that 
had been seen from several different localities in both islands of 
New Zealand on 26 March 1965.  People in Napier, New Plymouth,

[PAG 36]
Palmerston North, Wanganui, Feilding and Otaki Forks in the North 
Island; Nelson Coast Road, Blenheim and Westport (Cape Foulwind) 
in the South Island, had all reported sightings. 
It was decided that I try to plot the track of this UFO. From the 
considerable amount of information available I found that the maxi- 
mum variation in the times of sightings from all areas was 15 minutes. 
Most reports gave the time as 9:45 pm. This proved that the object 
must have been very large and at high altitude during the greater 
part of its trajectory. 
Here is a brief description of each sighting taken from the origi- 
nal reports: 
1. New Plymouth 
About 9:40 pm Mr. A. Nixon went outside his home to put out the 
milkbottles. He had a clear view over the sea to the north. A 
glow first appeared on the horizon and as he looked at it he saw 
a light that was approaching slowly. Then it came nearer at 
tremendous speed, lighting up the clouds in a red glow as it 
passed through them. As it passed overhead in a clear patch of 
sky, the object was sharply defined. It was bright white in colour, 
and was ball-shaped with a silvery edge. After passing overhead 
the rear emitted a red glow. It sped to the west of Mt Egmont 
and disappeared. According to Mr. Nixon "his hair stood on end". 
2. Napier 
A bright object was seen by a resident to curve through the sky 
at 9:45 pm. It was visible in the north-west and changed colour 
from white to a vivid green, then to a vivid red before it disap- 
peared behind some trees. 
3.  Wanganui 
Between 9:30 pm and 10:00 pm Mr. M. F. C. Grotenhuis was 
looking out of a window when he saw a flash similar to lightning. 
Then he observed a fireball which appeared to fall towards the 
south. It began as a bright white light, changed to greenish blue, 
then to a sizzling red before it disappeared like a shooting star. 
The sky was clear at the time. 
4. Feilding 
While cycling up a hill Miss Ralda Campbell heard a swishing 
sound.  It was followed by a blinding blue- white light, similar to 
a flash of sheet lightning.   The whole area was lit by this, then 
she saw a huge orange ball that "looked like a dinner-plate". The 
ball seemed to emanate from the left edge of the blue-white light. 
After a few seconds it exploded and three orange balls, like tennis

[PAG 37]
balls and very dense, appeared at the right-hand edge and dis- 
appeared. 
Miss Campbell said the three smaller balls seemed to emerge 
from the larger ball when it vanished. The apparent track was 
from north-east to south-west. 
5. Palmerston North 
A woman witness saw an object in the sky at about 9:30 pm. It 
was a vivid green with a long comet-like tail issuing from a deep 
orange centre. It descended and disappeared from view behind 
a nearby building. 
6.   Otaki Forks 
This is a position in the tararua mountain range. While tramping 
in the area, five Venturer Scouts saw an enormous bluish-white 
ball of light in the sky at 9:45 pm. This was surrounded by what 
looked like sheet lightning. The sighting was brief; the ball 
seemed to be stationary and apparently far away to the west, and 
about half the size of a full moon. One of the scouts, Mr Parnell, 
Baid that later the size of the object worked out trigonometrically 
by the group and the diameter arrived at was about 2000 feet. 
7.  Nelson 
Over the mudflats of Tasman Bay, a resident saw a very bright 
flash 
in 
the 
sky. 
Immediately 
afterwards, 
three 
bright 
green 
balls descended at a 45° angle. This was 9:45 pm (a flying 
pawnshop?). 
8.  Nelson Coast Road 
At 9:45 pm a Nelson resident driving towards Wakapuaka saw a 
big white ball with a bluish tail light up the place like day. It 
then burst in a shower of bright particles. 
9.  Westport 
Mr. L.H. Keay, a farmer, saw a bright object in the sky. It was 
far brighter than the moon, and lit up the sky with a bright 
white light that changed to green, and then to red. It apparently 
fell eastwards.   The time was "somewhere around 10 o'clock". 
10. Blenheim 
Mr. and Mrs. Bell and their daughter Linda, Margaret White, 
and many other people, saw a great green ball of light that seemed 
to explode over their heads. A small brightly-coloured ball broke 
away and whizzed off to the east. It was 9:45 pm. Mrs. M. 
Christensen observed a green ball, about the size of a cricket 
ball. It descended steadily from the sky, and appeared to be very 
close and dull in colour.   Time 10:15 pm. 
19

[PAG 38]
There was nothing of any great significance or originality in 
these accounts, and they followed the pattern of many other sight- 
ings. However from the mass of detail supplied by so many differ- 
ent people over so wide an area, it was possible to plot the track of 
the object with reasonable accuracy. I started work on a Mercator's 
plotting chart, and after several hours of checking one report against 
the other and calculating possible elevations and trajectories, I felt 
I had refined the plot sufficiently to draw in the final track of the 
object, or objects.   The result is shown on Map 2. 
The track began about seventy nautical miles north of New Ply- 
mouth, passed just to the west of Mt. Egmont, and finished at D'Urville 
Island. When first seen the altitude would have been about 30,000 
feet curving down on a flight path to somewhere around 10,000 feet 
when it disappeared. 
Some time after those sightings on 26 March 1965 I had another 
look at the plot I had made. I could find no flaws in my thinking, 
but I needed more information. As I was to discover many times 
later, the clues were quite obvious, but I was then not sufficiently 
expert in realising their significance. In point of fact this first track- 
line was to be the starting point of a whole string of discoveries of 
which I have yet to find an end. 
I pored over that plot for a long time before it suddenly occurred 
to me that the track appeared in line with the position where I had 
sighted the unidentified submarine object, or USO, on 12 March 
1965. On extending the line back I found it was in line with the 
sightings of 26 March. I was positive there had to be a connection 
— but to prove it was a different matter. 
I checked my report files again and found that on 2 March some 
fishermen just north of the coast at New Plymouth had seen a large 
object plunge into the sea and disappear. They thought it was an 
aircraft and reported the incident to the appropriate authorities, but 
no aircraft or personnel were missing. I checked this position on 
the map and found that it also fitted the established trackline. Was 
this connected with the USO of 12 March, and could the two sight- 
ings be of the same object, sighted twice in ten days? Could it be 
working slowly up this track carrying out some project on the sea 
bed? I tucked this thought away for future reference and carried on 
with the search. 
It was some days later that I remembered the UFO I had seen 
in 1956. This object was similar and, most significant of all, both 
objects had apparently travelled at 90° to each other, and finished

[PAG 39]
MAPS 
 
Showing path of UFO from Kaipara Harbour to D'Urville Island. 
21

[PAG 40]
in the same grand all illuminating flash in the area of D'Urville 
Island. 
If these objects were not controlled, how could anyone explain 
such coincidences? No two meteors or other natural phenomena 
could coincidentally carry out similar manoeuvres, travel at 90° to 
each other, and both decide to end their existence at the same point 
in space, within nine years of each other. Also, in both cases, 
objects had been seen to emerge from the parent bodies. Was this 
irrefutable evidence that they were intelligently controlled vehicles. 
I plotted the track of the 1956 UFO on the map at 90° to the 
north-south line. I realised that I had no definite proof that they 
were at exactly 90° to each other or that the 1956 track was not a 
few miles north or south of this position — still, I had to start from 
somewhere, and I would assume this to be correct unless and until 
other evidence proved me wrong. 
Two track lines at 90° meant little on their own. If I found 
several at 90°, I might have something — a grid perhaps? These 
two lines hinted at this, and I believed that if I could solve the 
system of measurement, then I had two readymade baselines to 
work from. 
Once again I went to the UFO files and found that a Frenchman 
by the name of Aime' Michel had been studying UFOs for a number 
of years and had found small sections of tracklines in various areas 
of Europe.  Saucers had been seen hovering at various points along 
these tracklines, and Mr. Michel had observed that the average 
distance between these points was 54.43 kilometres.   By itself this 
was only a small grain of information but, like a starting gun, it set 
me off again. 
Using the Kaipara Harbour as a starting point, I marked off the 
54.43 kilometre intervals along the trackline I had found. I was 
disappointed when I was unsuccessful in obtaining an even distri- 
bution of positions to the D'Urville Island disappearing point. I 
checked and re-checked, but nothing worked out. I slept on the 
problem, and at some time during the night inspiration turned up 
the wick; once more the light grew bright. 
I remembered that a great number of sightings had occurred 
around the Blenheim area. Even before the advent of ordinary 
aircraft in New Zealand, this area had been visited by UFOs. I had 
read about them in old copies of the local papers, and many recent 
sightings suggested again that this area had something special 
about it.

[PAG 41]
So I dragged out my map and extended the trackline until it cut 
a 90° coordinate from the town of Blenheim. The distance from this 
point to the Kaipara position I found to be exactly 300 nautical 
miles.   So far so good.   I stepped off the 54.43 kilometre intervals 
- and swore. Still the thing didn't fit! Frustration was always my 
companion in this business, and we had many, many arguments! 
Sometimes it was a protracted battle of wits...a fiddle with my computer 
and I was off again. 
The distance of 54.43 kilometres found by Michel was only an 
average estimate.  I found that 55.5955 kilometres was equal to 30 
nautical miles, and this divides exactly into 300 nautical miles, ten 
times.   Was this the system of measurement used by the UFOs? 
There was no proof of course, but it seemed a reasonable assump- 
tion.   A minute of arc is a measurement which could apply to the 
Whole universe.   It just so happens that a minute of arc, from the 
earth's centre subtends, at the surface, what we call a nautical mile. 
So be it........ 
Since I made that statement in my first book I have been at- 
tacked repeatedly by university personnel and others in the aca- 
demic field. They have maintained that degrees and minutes of arc 
are arbitrary values set up by the ancient mathematicians and that 
therefore my calculations are meaningless.   I believe the evidence 
shown in this book will now convince them that my original as- 
sumptions were correct.    The angular values of 360° and 21,600 
minutes of arc which constitute a complete circle have direct geo- 
metric associations with the speed of light. 
The fifth interval of 30 nautical miles from the Kaipara position 
coincided with the position off the coast of New Plymouth where the 
mysterious object had plunged into the sea. The plotted points of 
disappearance of the two large UFOs at D'Urville Island did not 
quite match up with the ninth interval, but this did not worry me 
unduly as I expected that a small percentage of error must be ex- 
pected in my original plot. I readjusted this position to the ninth 
interval, and carried on the search to see how many other sightings 
I could fit into this pattern. 
The results exceeded my expectations. I found that by using 
units of 30 minutes of arc latitude north-south, and 30 minutes of 
arc longitude east-west, on my Mercator's map, a grid pattern was 
formed into which a great number of UFO reports could be fitted. 
I eventually had a map with sixteen stationary and seventeen moving 
UFOs plotted on grid intersections and tracklines.

[PAG 42]
MAP 3

[PAG 43]
Having satisfied myself that my reasoning and plotting were 
  not false,  I  considered that I had good proof that New  Zea- 
and, possibly other countries, and probably the whole world, were 
being systematically covered by some type of grid system (see 
grid 
map 
3). 
I subsequently discovered that the grid lattice could be further 
divided. It is now evident that the grid lines in the main system are 
spaced at intervals of 7.5 minutes of arcnorth-south, and east-west. 
The importance of this will prove itself when compared with the rest 
of the calculation in this book.   There are 21,600 minutes of arc in 
a circle, and when this is divided by 7.5 we get a value of 2880. The 
grid lattice therefore is tuned harmonically to twice the speed of 
light (288), as will be shown in other sections. 
It appeared that I had found a section of a geometric grid pattern 
in the New Zealand area. I now had to form some theory of con- 
struction for the whole world. I could then possibly fit the New 
Zealand section into it. 
By drawing a series of patterns on a small plastic ball I finally 
found a system which could be used as a starting point for a global 
investigation.   (The basic pattern is shown in diagram 2.) 
I was sure I was on the right track, but I now had to superimpose 
this pattern on the world globe.  It was essential that I find a point 
position somewhere on the earth upon which to orientate the geo- 
metrical pattern. I finally came upon an item of news that gave me 
a very important clue on how to proceed. 
On 29 August 1964 the American survey ship Eltanin was car- 
rying out a sweep of the sea-bed off the coast of South America. A 
series of submarine photographs was being taken of the area by 
means of a camera attached to a long cable. A surprise was in store 
when these photographs were developed. On one of the points, in 
marvellous detail, was an aerial-type object sticking up from an 
otherwise featureless sea-bed. 
The object appeared to be metallic and perfectly symmetrical in 
construction. The array consisted of six main crossbars with small 
knob-like ends and a small crossbar at the top. Each cross looked 
to be set at angles of 15° to the others, and the whole system stood 
about 2 feet in height. The position where this object was found was 
given as latitude 59°08' south, longitude 105° west. 
As this bit of ironmongery was situated at a depth 13,500 feet 
below the surface, I was certain that no human engineers had placed 
it there.

[PAG 44]
Aerial type object photographed by the survey ship "Eltanin'

[PAG 45]
DIAGRAM 2 
Showing relationship of grid structure to the geographic poles. Each of the 
two grids has a simitar pattern, the interaction of which sets up a third 
resultant grid. The poles of the three grids are positioned at three different 
latitudes and longitudes.

[PAG 46]
Scientists may be able to descend to those depths in specially 
constructed bathyspheres, but I don't think they could work as deeply 
as that on a precision engineering problem. In view of my earlier 
sightings in the Kaipara Harbour, I was willing to accept that the 
aerial-type object had been placed there by a unidentified subma- 
rine object, or USO. 
Since this photo was taken there has been a determined attempt 
by the scientific world to label this object as nothing more that a 
plant of some sort. A journalist friend and I managed to visit the 
Eltanin during one of its few visits to New Zealand and when we 
discussed this object with some of the scientists on board, the com- 
ment was that it was classed as an artefact. This was before the 
great hush-up but, regardless of that, I believe that the mathemati- 
cal proofs will show without doubt that the object is artificial, and 
most probably an aerial of some sort. 
The form of this aerial-like structure also fitted in with the gen- 
eral pattern of the grid as I had envisaged it on the plastic ball. The 
six main crossbars denoted the radiating points of six or twelve 
great circles which form the main structure of the grid. 
I centred the grid on the position of the object found by the El- 
tanin, and the 180° reciprocal of this is in Russian Siberia, lining 
the whole thing up with the section I had found in New Zealand.  I 
found the system to be lined up very closely with the magnetic field 
of the earth.  The equator of the grid followed very closely the line 
of zero dip around the world.   (That is, the positions on the earth's 
surface where a magnetic compass needle has only a horizontal and 
no vertical component.) 
In my earlier works I discussed the methods I used to line up the 
system and calculate the first estimates of the grid pole positions, 
and the major focal points of the grid similar to the Eltanin "aeriali 
placement. 
The reciprocal position of the Eltanin "aerial" is at latitude 59°08' 
north, longitude 75° east, in Siberia.  I calculated the length of the 
diagonal of what I call, for simplicity, the "polar grid square" and 
found it to be 5091.168825 minutes of the arc long. I plotted a track 
from the Siberian position through the north geographic pole and 
measured off this distance to locate another corner "aerial" of the 
polar square. (Square is not technically the right word to use as the 
four sides are formed by sections of small circles which are in dif- 
ferent planes to each other.   When the "polar square" areas are 
transferred from the surface of the earth sphere on to a flat plane

[PAG 47]
such as a map, then a perfect square is formed with sides 3600 
minutes long and diagonals of 5091.168825 minutes of arc.) 
In my first two books I stated, in error, that the sides of the 
"polar squares" were formed by sections of GREAT circles 3600 minutes 
of arc long, instead of SMALL circles. The great circle distance 
between these points is in fact 3,418.5 minutes of arc, which is very 
confusing to any investigator attempting to reconstruct the grid. I 
apologise to my readers for this error, which was caused by my lack 
of access to calculators during my earlier research. In the grid 
pattern there are actually two small circle segments, and one great- 
circle segment connecting each of these points which form the polar 
squares. Each of the segments has a different path over the earth 
and some tricky calculating is necessary to ascertain the true length. 
Although I used the wrong term in my earlier publications, the 
actual calculations derived from the grid system are not altered in 
any way, and still stand the test of time. Over the last few years 
I have slightly refined the values I demonstrated previously, de- 
rived from a mixture of practical and theoretical studies. I have now 
set up what I see as a completely theoretical system, discovered by 
working entirely by calculator. Time will prove how close my cal- 
culations are. I have no doubt that I, and others, will continue 
further to perfect the system as more facts come to light. 
Once I had established this first baseline I found it quite easy to 
construct the main skeleton of the grid over the whole surface of the 
earth. 
As my work progressed I found that there were in fact two similar 
grids, interlocked with each other. The poles of the grids were 
spaced at different distances from the north geometric pole, and this 
arrangement set up a series of geometric harmonics which were 
directly related to the speed of light, mass, and gravity.  The inter- 
action of the two grids created a harmonic resonance which in turn, 
formed a third resultant grid. 
The theoretical position for the three grid poles in the northern 
hemisphere are a follows: 
Grid pole "A" = Latitude   72.4266°/longitude   90°   west   1054.4 
minutes of arc from the North Pole. 
Grid pole "B" = Latitude   78.4266°/longitude   105°  west  694.4 
minutes of arc from the North Pole.

[PAG 48]
Resultant grid pole "C" = Latitude 75.6°/longitude 97.5° west 864 minutes 
of arc from the North Pole. Reciprocal positions will give similar values for 
the southern hemisphere.

[PAG 49]
DIAGRAM 3 
Showing the relationship of a grid polar square to the geographic pole. Each 
grid has a similar pattern. The pole of each grid is set at a different latitude 
and longitude.

[PAG 50]
DIAGRAM 4 
Showing the relationship of grid polar squares A, B, and C. The polar 
squares are orientated in reciprocal positions around both the north and 
south geographic poles.

[PAG 51]
3>   THE UNIFIED EQUATIONS 
SPACE 
TRAVEL, 
THANKS 
TO 
THE 
AMERICAN 
AND 
Russian rocket programmes, is a reality. By using great masses 
of hardware, miles of wiring and plumbing, Newton's law of 
motion and some not inconsiderable beginner's luck, the first man 
on the moon has stepped out of the pages of Jules Verne into his- 
story.   Probes have been sent out to study Venus and Mars at close 
quarters.   Considering the brief time in which man has taken seri- 
ous notice of ways to bridge the gap between earth and sky, these 
are remarkable achievements. 
During the 1939-45 war German scientists were carrying out 
experiments in rocketry; their experiences gained in directing doo- 
dlebugs towards London made them the leaders in this field; Werner 
von Braun and other German experts subsequently passed on their 
knowledge and experience to others on both sides of the Iron Cur- 
tain. Those Model T's of rocketry, the V-2s, have given rise to the 
sophisticated Apollo and Vostok power units which thrust compara- 
tively tiny pay-loads into the void of space. 
They work.   And they have enabled man to venture far away 
from his own planet. 
Yet, before the first space vehicle built on this planet thrust its 
snout beyond the ultimate atom of air in the envelope which clings 
as a life-sustaining wrapper about our planet, the method was al- 
ready out of date.   It may have been out of date centuries ago.  As 
a means of propulsion rockets are obsolete — as obsolete as a pro- 
pulsion method as the sling-shot is out of date as a weapon. In both 
cases brute force is the criterion; in both cases the law of diminishing 
returns rules the game.   As the power of the prime mover is in- 
creased, the size and cost of the system becomes less and less prac- 
ticable, and the pay-load must eventually fail to give sufficient re- 
turns in relation to the effort expended in moving it through space. 
A rocket allowed mankind to take the first essential step; but it 
is obvious, if we stop to think about it, that rocket propulsion cannot 
ba the answer to exploration of the star systems that surround 
our galaxy. 
Even if we could eventually achieve speeds approaching that of 
light itself, we could never hope to venture far from the solar system 
33

[PAG 52]
in one lifetime. The distances are vast; rockets the size of small 
cities would be necessary, so that several generations could live out 
their lives during the journey through space in order that there 
would be colonists for the far planet destinations. 
It might be possible to do this. It would not be very practicable. 
As a theme for science fiction writers it has been a bountiful source 
of stories. 
The first glimmerings of how true space travel might be achieved 
came to me when I uncovered the first clues that led me to the UFO 
grid which laces about our globe. I published my findings and 
hoped that someone with greater scientific knowledge than I possess 
would carry on from that point — and finally discover every secret 
locked into the system. 
I was aware that my calculations were not precisely accurate — 
in the strict mathematical sense — but I could see that the system 
was based on space-time geometries, and at least there was the best 
possible support for this none less than the theories of Einstein. 
Somewhere, I knew, the system contained a clue to the truth of 
the unified field which, he has postulated, permeates all of exis- 
tence. I didn't know at the time that this clue had already been 
found by scientists who were well ahead of me in the play. I know 
now that they must have understood something of the grid system 
years ago. They knew that Einstein's ideas about the unified field 
were correct. What's more, for many years they have been carrying 
out full-scale research into the practical applications of the mathe- 
matical concept contained in that theory. 
I believe, and with good reason, that the full facts have been 
known to at least some scientists for many years. 
The very fact that man-made scientific equipment has been built 
into the UFO grid system, which I put forward as a theory years 
ago, is evidence that at least some people had prior knowledge of the 
grid and its workings. It must have taken them years to build up 
the network of stations which now exists. But as far as they or 
their masters are concerned, it is not our right to know. 
The only way to traverse the vast distances of space is to possess 
the means of manipulating, or altering, the very structure of space 
itself; altering the space-time geometric matrix, which to us pro- 
vides the illusion of form and distance. The method of achieving 
this lies in the alteration of frequencies controlling the matter-anti- 
matter cycles which govern our awareness or perception of position 
in the space-time structure.    Time itself is a geometric, just as

[PAG 53]
Einstein postulated; if time can be altered, then the whole universe 
is waiting for us to come and explore its nooks and crannies. 
In the blink of an eye we could cross colossal distances; for dis- 
lance is an illusion.   The only thing keeping places apart in space 
is time. If it were possible to move from one position to another in 
space, in an infinitely small amount of time, or "zero time", then 
both the positions would coexist, according to our awareness.   By 
speeding up the geometric of time we will be able to bring distant 
places within close proximity. This is the secret of the UFOs — they 
travel by means of altering the spatial dimensions around them and 
repositioning in space-time.. 
When I had completed my first book I was not aware of just how 
close I had come to this truth. The answer was literally staring at 
me from the pages of my own work for nearly three years, before a 
visit from a stranger brought it into my grasp. 
A year after the book was published I had a telephone call from 
a man who had just arrived in New Zealand from England.   He 
explained that he was a textile salesman and would be here for only 
a few days on business.  He said he had heard of my research, and 
was most insistent that he should see me. He said that he had very 
little knowledge of UFOs, but that he would like to talk to me about 
my theories.   Could he come out to my home for a visit? 
On that particular evening I was busy with some affairs of my 
own; I wasn't anxious to entertain a stranger, but in the end I 
agreed to see him. 
He arrived in a rented car, and at once began questioning me 
about my activities and my research.   It was soon obvious that he 
knew a great deal more about the subject of UFOs than he was 
prepared to admit; and he was quite demanding about getting his 
questions answered. He had an air of nervous tension about him as 
he checked through pages of my calculations; then he wanted to 
know where I kept all of my data, and if there were many people 
who knew about my studies. 
I make no secret of whatever findings I turn up, and I showed 
him everything he asked to see.  Finally he insisted that there was 
something I hadn't shown him — an equation which knitted all my 
calculations together. In some surprise I told him I knew of no such 
equation; his expression was eloquent of disbelief. 
As this discussion proceeded I informed him that there were 
probably others who thought as he did — that I had some such 
equation up my sleeve, because I was being watched and on several

[PAG 54]
occasions my car had been followed. I added that since he had come 
to my home he would most likely have unwanted company on his 
way back into the city. Whoever it was that was keeping an eye on 
me, I told him, would probably believe him to be a contact man from 
abroad and would therefore be interested in his movements. 
I must admit that I told him this intriguing little tale to see what 
his reaction might be. I was fascinated to see his apparent nervous- 
ness become increased, and in some agitation he decided it was time 
to leave. His departure was hurried; I have neither seen him nor 
heard of him since. 
For the next two or three days I found myself going over and 
over his questions. The more I thought about it, the more convinced 
I became that the stranger had known far more about my calcula- 
tions than I did myself. Was there something there which he could 
see — but which I had missed? If there was an equation buried 
somewhere in my figuring, then I would have to find it. 
Reworking the math, I finally decided to concentrate specifically 
on three harmonic values which appeared to have a close relation- 
ship with one another. Previously, I had shown this connection, 
and had truthfully pointed out that I did not know why the relation- 
ship was there at all. These were the harmonic values that now 
fully occupied my attention: 
1703 — This is the four-figure harmonic of 170,300,000,000, which 
is the expression in cubic minutes of arc of the mass or volume of 
the planet Earth and its surrounding atmosphere. 
 
1439 — A four-figure harmonic of 143,900 minutes of arc per grid 
second, representing the speed of light in grid values. 
2640 — This figure, expressed in minutes of arc values, is built into 
the polar portion of the grid structure as a geometric co-ordinate. 
Now I found that when I matched these values harmonically the 
results were as follows. Zeros to the right-hand side can be ignored 
in this form of harmonic calculation: