=== The energy grid - Harmonic 695. The pulse of the universe (Bruce L. Cathie).pdf — CHUNK 3/12 ===
Chars: 44,407 | Offset: 88,239



[PAG 55]
In other words the difference between the harmonic of mass and 
the harmonic of light is the harmonic of 264(or 2640). It was now 
apparent that if any calculations were more accurately worked out 
it should be possible to find out just what the 2640 figure re- 
ferred to. 
After several hours of work the following was what looked up at 
me from my paper: 
17025 earth mass harmonic 
-2636 unknown harmonic 
14389 
Checking through the five-figure mathematical tables I found to 
my surprise that 2.6363 is the square root of 6.95 (from the 1-10 
square root tables). In harmonic calculations of this kind decimal 
points as well as zeros to the right of a figure can be ignored; so it 
could be said that the square root of 695 was 2636. Now I could 
perceive the first steps necessary to solving the elusive equation. I 
had long established that 695 is the harmonic reciprocal of the 
speed of light, or 1/1439. The calculations were now sufficiently 
accurate for algebraic values to be substituted — although obviously 
a computer would be necessary to solve the true values to extreme 
accuracy. 
17025(earth mass) 
-2636(square root of speed of light reciprocal) 
14389(speed of light) 
If  C = the speed of light, and 
M = mass 
Then
 
Now at last I had the first part of a unified field equation in 
harmonic values.   To take the next step I first had to go back to 
Einsteinian theory, particularly the famous equation, E=MC2, where 
E is energy, M is mass and C the speed of light. 
Einstein declared that physical matter was nothing more than a 
concentrated field of force.  What we term physical substance is in 
37

[PAG 56]
reality an intangible concentration of wave forms. Different combi- 
nations and structural patterns of waves unite to form the myriads 
of chemicals and elements which in turn react with one another to 
form physical substances. Different wave forms of matter appear to 
us to be solid because we are constituted of similar wave forms 
which resonate within a clearly defined range of frequencies — and 
which control the physical processes of our limited world. 
Einstein believed that M, the value for mass in the equation. 
could eventually be removed, and a value substituted that would 
express the physical in the form of pure energy.  In other words, by 
substituting for M, a unified field equation should result which 
would express in mathematical terms the whole of existence — this 
universe, and everything within it. As I have already said, it seems 
that before his death Einstein did indeed produce this equation. 
What the mathematical terms were which he used, I do not know; 
but I couldn't help wondering what results I might get if I were to 
tackle the problem from the point of harmonic math. If an equation 
could be found which had a harmonic affinity with all substance, 
one which showed a resonance factor tuned to matter itself, then 
the problem, perhaps, would be solved. 
Einstein maintained that the M in his equation could be replaced 
by a term denoting wave form. I had now found a substitute for M 
in terms of wave form of light. So the obvious step, to me, was to 
replace Einstein's M with the values of C, found from the UFO grid. 
These are the results I obtained: 
 
in terms of light - or pure electromagnetic wave form — the key to 
the universe, the whole existence; to the seen and the unseen, to 
form, solids, liquids, gases, the stars and the blackness of space 
itself, all consisting of visible and invisible waves of light. All of 
creation is light; that was the answer that had been right within my 
grasp for four years.

[PAG 57]
Now it was necessary to check the validity of the equation; to 
accomplish this I needed a computer and the help of an expert in 
pure mathematics. 
A young man who had attended one of my lectures said he was 
willing to put a small computer at my service and a friend of his, 
an excellent mathematician who had a larger computer was willing 
to programme it harmonically to give me assistance should I need 
it. I was deeply appreciative of both offers and the subsequent 
calculations proved the initial equation to be valid.  Throughout all 
my research I have always been at the limits of my own knowledge, 
for ever frustrated by my slow rate of progress.  I could always see 
much further ahead than my technical ability would allow me to 
travel. 
In my earlier publications I had stated that I believed that the 
value of 2545.58, the geometric distance in minutes of arc, from the 
grid poles to the main corner aerial positions, in the grid polar 
squares, was a harmonic of gravity acceleration.   I am now aware 
that his assumption was incorrect and that the true value for the 
harmonic of gravity acceleration is derived from the speed of light. 
The diagonal of the "polar square" of 5091.168825 units can be 
broken down into a series of values: 
5091.168824 / 2 = 2545.584412 
2545.5844122       = 6480000 
The number 648 is a harmonic factor of great importance, as will 
be demonstrated in other sections of this book. The many other 
harmonic factors centred around the "polar square" corner aerial 
positions, form a series of complex mathematical associations and 
this can be left for those who wish to carry out their own research. 
The reciprocal of 2545.58, rounded off to four-figure accuracy, 
was given as a harmonic of 3930, (Now corrected to 3928371). When 
I made my initial discovery of the unified equations, the harmonic 
of 3930 was thought to be that of anti-gravity. It is now known that 
this value is related to the earth's magnetic field. Although I la- 
belled them wrongly the actual values have stood the test of time 
and still fit into the equations as originally demonstrated. 
The harmonic equations are those from which an atomic bomb is 
developed.   By setting up derivatives of the equation in geometric 
form, the relative motions of the wave forms inherent in matter are 
zeroed, and convert from material substance back into pure energy. 
39

[PAG 58]
By reversing the process, physical substance in any desired shape 
or form could be produced from pure energy. 
While practical applications of the latter possibility may still be 
far in the future, we are nevertheless at least capable, now, of 
destroying matter. As I have stated elsewhere — scientists can 
make a bang from a bomb, but as yet they are still unable to get the 
bang back into the bottle. 
Although I was much happier with progress when I arrived at 
this point in my calculations, there were still some important an- 
swers missing. As far as they went, the equations explained the 
workings of a nuclear explosive device, but they still had not yielded 
the secrets of UFO propulsion. The UFO grid was undoubtedly 
constructed on the basis of the equation, yet a UFO does not disin- 
tegrate when it moves within the resonating fields of the system. 
There had to be an extension of the equation, which so far I had 
missed, that would produce the necessary harmonics for movement 
in space-time. But I felt close to the solution, and I was determined 
to find it. 
It has often been my experience that when a stalemate is reached 
it is best to throw aside one's work for a time and take a rest. For 
the next few weeks I deliberately forgot everything even remotely 
connected with UFOs. But one evening, unheralded and unex- 
pected, a thought flashed into my mind. Why only deal with single 
values of C? 
The key was turned and a sequence of doors swung open, one 
after another, to reveal secrets of space and time. 
In the polar area of the UFO grid the geometric valuesof some of 
the co-ordinates appear to be doubled up. 
The diagrams of the "polar squares," as I have termed them, in- 
corporate twice the value of 2545.56. 
In the resultant grid polar square the speed of light reciprocal 
harmonic of 695 is incorporated in a harmonic of 2695. These co- 
ordinates are the same from corner aerial positions to the geographic 
poles. It appears that the factor 2 preceding the 695 serves to 
harmonically double the reciprocal of the speed of light. 
I reasoned that a way to check this idea was to increase the 
values of C in my equation, and observe the changing harmnonic of 
E. In a few hours in pursuit of this line of thought, I was able to 
say: "I have found something extremely interesting". 
It was apparent that one only had to double the value of C. Once 
I had done this, it was possible to produce two different equations 
40

[PAG 59]
through the use of the tables relating to the square root portion of 
the equation. The results differed according to whether square 
roots 1-10 or 10-100 were employed. In equation No. 1, I found that 
the resulting harmonic was: 3926991712050. 
This was the value calculated by the computer after we had fed 
the equation in, and gradually corrected from one side of the equa- 
tion to the other. I was only too well aware that my calculations 
were only of "near-enough" accuracy up to this point, and had been 
sufficient only to form a general basis for the theories I had devel- 
eped. Four-figure accuracy in fact is just not nearly good enough, 
as any pure scientist will be quick to agree. By feeding in the 
harmonics on either side of the equation and gradually correcting, 
the 12-digit value was finally arrived at. 
This harmonic is not yet completely accurate; larger computers 
will the necessary to carry on the correction to the ultimate of pre- 
cision. Nevertheless, the result is now "good enough" as far as I am 
concerned, and it may at least start off a scientist of an independent 
nature to carry out further investigations of his own. 
I 
had 
shown 
previously 
that 
the 
four 
figure 
harmonic 
of 
3930 (rounded off to four figures) was the close reciprocal of 2545.58. 
In a practical sense the values were near enough to demonstrate 
what I was trying to establish. Therefore I considered that the 
harmonic of 392699171205, derived by doubling the C component of 
the equation, was also indicating a reciprocal of the 2545.58 value 
found in the grid polar square areas. With slight corrections the 
equation could nowbe expressed thus: 
 
 The second equation is derived by using the square root of the 
10-100 tables.   This equation is as follows: 
 
The nearest we have brought this to accuracy, using a small desk 
computer, is as follows: 
 
41

[PAG 60]
42 
 
The speed of light harmonic accurate to four figures is equal to 
1439, as I have said elsewhere. The value used in this calculation 
according to the more accurate computer check equals 1438881. As 
I have already stated, the true value will only be derived by the use 
of highly sophisticated computers. 
Another possible lead for mathematician readers is the fact that 
the natural tangent of 36° is 72654. The square of 26953 from the 
equation is 726504, which is very close. 
The fact that the harmonic of light has only to be doubled in 
order to obtain anti-light fields must be related to the matter and 
antimatter cycles of the physical and the non-physical worlds. If 
the two, plus and minus, fields are interlocked, as I have postulated, 
and matter and anti-matter manifest in alternate pulses, then a 
double cycle must occur between each pulse of matter and anti- 
matter. The anti- matter pulse cannot be perceived by us, for fairly 
obvious reasons; but when calculating the frequency interaction 
between the two, both cycles must be taken into account. 
By stepping up or slowing down the frequency of C between the 
two cycles, a shift in space-time must occur.

[PAG 61]
4>   FURTHER EVIDENCE OF THE UFO GRID 
AND 
NOW 
TO 
LOOK 
AT 
SOME 
EVIDENCE 
OF 
THE 
existence of the global grid which is used by UFOs, either 
for propulsion, navigation or both. 
In the early part of 1968 I was approached by a co-pilot of a 
National Airways Corporation Viscount. He had an interesting account 
for me: 
The previous day he had been a crew member of a Viscount 
flying north to Auckland from Wellington. Between New Plymouth 
and Auckland, with the aircraft at 19,000 feet, a request was re- 
ceived from Air Traffic Control to divert slightly starboard of track. 
Radar operators at Auckland airport had three stationary objects on 
their screen, spaced at intervals down the west coast between Rag- 
lan and New Plymouth. 
The Viscount was vectored towards these positions by radar control, 
and the crew was asked to scan the area, to check whether the 
objects causing the radar blips were visible to the human eye. 
The manoeuvre was carried out accurately, but there was no 
sight of anything unusual in the sky. Although the presentation of 
the objects on the radar screen was clear and pronounced, the op- 
erators, in view of the crew's negative report, prepared to dismiss 
the incident. And suddenly the blips disappeared, disposing of the 
problem anyway. 
Until the next day, when I appeared in the radar room with my 
grid map under may arm. 
I discussed the incident with the radar crew, and one of them 
then plotted the positions of the three unknown objects on the radar 
map on the display board. When these positions were compared 
with my grid map, it was immediately apparent that the UFOs were 
spaced along one of the north-south grid lines running down the 
coast, and that the intervals between the UFOs were thirty nautical 
miles and fifteen nautical miles — a spacing that coincided with 
track lines running east-west on the grid. 
Clearly our visitors were active again; some project was in prog- 
ress on this section of the system occupying their attention when 
they had been disturbed by the approach of the Viscount.

[PAG 62]
Recently I have been able to correlate this particular incident 
with other human activity off the coast of New Zealand, which 
strongly suggests that our close-lipped scientists are not only aware 
of the actual existence of alien visitors, but are indeed working in 
close co-operation with them. We shall enlarge upon this point 
later. 
By now my old, original grid map, which I completed in 1965, is 
showing signs of wear and tear; but it still helps me to prove to 
anyone interested that the grid is no myth, not something I have 
just dreamed up in order to confuse an already baffled public. I 
could not possibly have predicted the positions of those three blips 
seen on an airport radar screen, long before they actually made 
their appearance; yet, unless the grid map is in fact accurate and 
reliable, that is the only alternative explanation. At least one of my 
critics has dismissed my work with an amusingly contemptuous "Oh 
well, you can prove anything by numbers!" Forecasting the future 
by numbers and lines may or may not be possible, but I have nei- 
ther the training, knowledge nor understanding to attempt that sort 
of thing. And I'm pretty sure I don't possess second sight; more's 
the pity! 
Another incident which occurred later in 1968 was one that startled 
the flying fraternity. The RNZAF was in on this one, but as hap- 
pens with air forces in other parts of the world the authorities 
quickly hushed the matter up. The lid was slammed down tightly 
on Pandora's box, which must be pretty full by now; it manages to 
fly open with increasing regularity, much to the anguish of those 
who would like to have the whole business of UFOs thought of by 
the public as a modern fairy-tale. 
An Air Force Orion was carrying out a routine exercise mission 
off the west coast of New Zealand's North Island one cloudy after- 
noon, when the crew was alerted by radar control.  An unidentified 
object was travelling at the leisurely pace of about forty knots from 
north to south some thirty miles off the coast.    The Orion was 
requested to check on this intruder, and was vectored on to an 
intercept course. Approaching closer to the object, the Orion's forward- 
seeking radar locked on to the visitor, but there was no solid object 
visible to anyone on board.  According to my information the object 
then lost altitude, and the Orion followed it down.   The crew then 
reported that a whirlpool-like eddy was visible on the surface of the 
sea.  Perhaps the object, whatever it was, had dived into the ocean 
and escaped in submarine fashion.

[PAG 63]
This, you may be sure, will not be the last time that UFOs will 
be tracked by radar in our skies.   About once a month I am ap- 
proached by an aircrew member and am informed of yet another 
UFO sighting in the New Zealand area.  If all these crew members 
are crazy, then our airlines are a fairly precarious means of travel 
for the unsuspecting public. 
Why is it that none of the reports that reach me are printed in 
the newspapers? The answer is this: the newspapers never receive 
them. Aircrew members are, on the whole, a conservative breed, 
and they jealously guard their image as a sane and level-headed 
group, dedicated only to the task of flying in a "safe and expeditious 
manner", as it is termed in the code of regulations.   So far I have 
been one of the few foolish people in commercial flying to stick my 
neck out and make public what I have seen, theorised and heard. 
Perhaps in the near future others in my profession will come for- 
ward give support to my statements; there are many who believe, 
as I do, that the truth is more important than most of the artificial 
criteria with which we burden ourselves in this so-called civilised 
society of ours. 
Nuclear tests are still with us, and provide a perfect check on the 
harmonic calculations which I described previously.   The French 
were active at Mururoa Island again in 1968, and gave me a further 
opportunity to make some predictions on the possible dates on which 
a nuclear device could be exploded. 
Mostly for my own satisfaction I spent one evening calculating 
all| the possible combinations in harmonic values necessary for the 
detonation of a nuclear bomb, to cover the whole of the testing 
period. 
  I was quite aware that I had not yet discovered all of the har- 
monics  involved,  but by  carrying out  constant checks  on  the 
activities of the scientists involved, I hoped that in time most of the 
secrets would eventually be revealed.  I doubt if many of the boffins 
will welcome my constant snooping; but I believe that if the public 
is under a constant threat of annihilation they at least have the 
  right to know how the mechanics of the operation will be carried 
out. The more knowledge we have, the better our chances of stop- 
ping 
these 
idiots 
from 
blasting 
our 
planet 
into 
eternity. 
A few weeks after I tucked away my calculations, I was invited 
to present a lecture on UFOs to the Royal Aeronautical Society in 
Auckland. Just before the lecture I was taken out to dinner by the 
president  and  the  secretary  of the   society.     Over  the  meal

[PAG 64]
conversation turned to my theories regarding the nuclear bomb tests. 
Not altogether unnaturally, the president was inclined to be skep- 
tical of my methods of calculation, and he asked me quite casually 
when the next French bomb would be detonated. I told him that the 
25th of the month, about a fortnight away, was my bet; the talk 
then switched to more mundane matters. 
The lecture, presented to a capacity audience, was well received, 
and the bomb discussion forgotten. 
On the 25th of the month the peace of Mururoa Island was 
shattered, and the echoes of the French nuclear explosion rippled 
around the world. It was another personal victory for me to chalk 
up. 
That afternoon my telephone rang. It was the president of the 
Royal Aeronautical Society. Could I come into the city for a chat, 
and could I give further test dates to cover the rest of the current 
French series? 
This I did. The dates I supplied proved to be correct, culminating 
in the explosion of France's hydrogen bomb. Further tests were 
cancelled when President de Gaulle found that the French bankers 
were having a lean year. It was a choice between bread and bombs, 
and bread won. 
I had proved my point that the dates of nuclear tests could be 
accurately predicted on the basis of harmonic calculations. The 
president of the Society, who is also the head of a government 
department, gave me a copy of notes he had made on some of my 
predictions. He told me that these had been passed on to the heads 
of other government departments. 
This memo is shown in photocopy No. 1. It shows that my 
prediction for the hydrogen bomb test was very close. For the 
moment I was quite satisfied with this very small error. I would 
have been satisfied had I been several hours out. 
Newsweek magazine reported: "Drilling for future nuclear tests 
— Last week's underground test of an 'advanced nuclear weapon' at 
Pahute Mesa, north of Las Vegas, foreshadows even bigger blasts. 
The atomic energy commission has drilled several cased holes a mile 
deep in Central Nevada 100 miles north of the present test site. It 
has let further contracts for construction of four test holes to a 
depth of 6000 feet on Amchitka, the fourth island from the end of 
the Aleutian chain. These holes take a year and a half to drill and 
mine out at the bottom. In essence the AEC is stockpiling holes in 
the ground against future test requirements." 
46

[PAG 65]
PHOTOCOPY 2 
PHOTOCOPY OF ATOM BOMB PREDICTIONS 
Photo-copy of predictions of atom tests to be carried out by French 
scientists at Mururoa Island in the Pacific, in 1968, handwritten and pre-
dated by the head of a government department in Auckland City, New 
Zealand. The actual time shown is that of the hydrogen bomb. I was 
informed that this note was passed on to four other government departments 
before the test date. 
47

[PAG 66]
Recent computer lists of the geometric positions of many atomic 
tests carried out at the Nevada test site show that a great number 
of them have been detonated on positions which straddle a latitude 
of 37.1195° north. This would create a reciprocal harmonic of 2694, 
an average value related to the unified equations discovered in my 
research. 
In my earlier publications I indicated that a mass value was 
possibly utilized for the Aleutian Island tests. Now that I have 
computers to work with I believe that a more accurate set of values 
can be demonstrated which would allow the geometric harmonics, 
required for successful detonation, to be fulfilled. 
A position of 51° 25' 10.85" north/ 179° 24' 00" east, on the south 
east end of the island would be ideal as a test site. 
The great circle distance from this point to longitude 180°, at the 
same latitude is: 
1347 seconds of arc; which is a half harmonic of 2694; the aver- 
age value derived from the unified equations. 
The circumference of the parallel of latitude at 51° 25' 10.85" is: 
13470 minutes of arc, or nautical miles, relative to the Equator. 
This again is a half harmonic of 2694 (unified equation). 
Other harmonics which are associated with this position and grid 
pole "B" in the north have connections with gravitation. This will 
be explained more fully in later works. 
For interest, the test site of Bikini Island and Eniwetok are 11° 
35' north latitude, which equals 695 minutes of arc.   This figure, 
695, is the harmonic of the speed of light reciprocal, or 1/1439. 
Johnson 
Island 
is 
169.5° 
west 
longitude. 
Note: 
It has been discovered in later research that the speed of light is 
not a constant over the earth's surface. It varies in relation to grav- 
ity acceleration. This in turn causes a slight variation of the values 
derived from the unified equations. This will be more fully ex- 
plained in future publications.

[PAG 67]
5>   THE MYSTERIOUS AERIALS 
ON 
A 
BLAZING 
MORNING 
OF 
FEBRUARY 
1968 
SOME 
information came my way which was to start off a whole 
new chain of investigation — and which was to bring me to 
number of discoveries so startling that even now their full impli- 
cations are hard to comprehend. 
As a theory, anti-gravity looks all very well. True, it would make 
obsolete overnight such antiquated forms of transportation as trains, 
cars, aircraft and rocket-propelled space ships; true, it would revo- 
tionise our thinking about fuel oil resources and basic engi- 
neering 
But suppose the theory were not only correct but in actual appli- 
cation today — suppose there were a great many people fully aware 
the existence of the UFO grid and its mighty potential as a power 
sourcethat could be tapped by earth technology; suppose, in fact, 
at equipment had been set up in many parts of the world, even 
right here in quiet New Zealand where nothing very earth-shatter- 
ing ever seems to happen — then would not this mean that in fact 
anti-gravity was virtually within the grasp of us all? 
A group of fellow-pilots and myself had finished preparing our 
bought plans for the first flight of the day, and we were chatting 
generatlly, when a co-pilot came up to me and said he had noticed 
odd looking aerial mast on his way to the airfield.   It was, he 
said, on private property, but its shape was so unusual, and it was 
patently 
expensive-looking, 
that 
it 
had 
caught 
his 
attention. 
Like many other aircrew members, this pilot had shown consid- 
erable interest in my UFO research and had got into the habit of 
noting any unusual activities up and down the country which could 
easibly have a bearing on my investigations.    By training and 
experince pilots are good observers and generally capable of making 
precise, factual, and impartial reports. In fact I am greatly indebted 
to pilots and aircrew as a group for a great deal of help and many 
fascinating leads. Many there present that February morning were 
aware of some suspicions I had concerning some unusual radio trans- 
mitting stations that were springing up around New Zealand.   But 
still this time I had no proof that these stations were anything 
other than  what  they  purported to  be;  what had principally

[PAG 68]
stimulated 
my 
suspicions 
was 
little 
more 
than 
an 
occasional 
rumour, and the evasiveness of officials when pointed questions 
were asked. 
The co-pilot wondered if the mast he had seen, with its strangely 
shaped array of aerials perched on top, could have any connection 
with the evidence I was looking for.  He made a rough sketch of the 
mast for me, and I immediately sensed a familiarity about the pat- 
tern in which the hardware was arranged.   Certainly it was only a 
rough sketch; the co-pilot, whatever his virtues, is no artist.   But 
the sketch he drew of the side view of the mast had a marked 
similarity to the polar patterns of the UFO grid system.   This in 
trigued me greatly and I had a hunch that a closer look at this 
aerial might provide a key to unlock yet another section of the 
Pandora's box with which I had become involved. 
That evening I contacted my journalist friend Peter Temm and 
we arranged to meet the next day. Armed with a camera equipped 
with a telephoto lens, we planned to drive to the area in question 
and quietly obtain a few close-ups of the aerial for closer scrutiny 
at our leisure. 
A few days later we pored over a series of ten, good enlarged 
photographs which showed the aerial and the house to which it was 
linked. The aerial was in the shape of a cube, with each side about 
nine feet long. Supports for the wires forming the box-like shape 
radiated from a central point. These were eight in number, with 
each individual support terminating at a corner of the box. The 
aerial was supported, from the central point of the box shape, on top 
of a lattice steel mast we estimated to be about thirty feet high. 
A check revealed that according to Post Office regulations this 
expensive and elaborate device was nothing more sinister than a 
ham radio aerial erected by the owner for communication with 
hundreds of other technically knowledgeable hams scattered around 
the world. 
Maybe so. We even found that there was a technical name for 
the general form of aerial in the photographs — neither of us being 
in any way informed about ham radio, this came as news. But 
somehow the gear had a slick, sophisticated look about it that gave 
it a ring of something more than the kind of ham devices one can 
see almost anywhere. Hams are enthusiastic and inventive folk 
skilful at rigging and jury-rigging their own-designed aerials; but a 
great deal of money is not generally laid out on the mast. In this 
country, at least, a length of wire stretched from a wooden mast is

[PAG 69]
more the norm. Sometimes the amateur operator will have a few 
dipoles across the top of his mast for directional purposes: but this 
one had a decidedly professional look about it. 
I decided to check a bit further and, to start off with, I set about 
plotting the position of the aerial on my Auckland grid map to see 
if any correlations would show up. 
At first nothing unusual presented itself; there seemed to be no 
connection with the aerial site and the grid system. But something 
kept nagging at me. I had a very strong feeling that there was a 
conection and that a thorough search of the facts and figures would 
bring it out. 
At this point I decided to plot co-ordinates from the various po- 
sitions of known UFO activity already plotted on an Auckland map. 
The results were immediately interesting.  A line plotted through a 
position where a large, disc-shaped UFO had been observed hover- 
ing over Inverary Road, Epsom, and the point where an unexplained 
explosion occurred in Rutland Street, Auckland, some eleven years 
previously, passed directly through the location of the North Shore 
aerial. This was hardly anything conclusive — but it suggested a 
possible lead. I told Peter of my find, and we agreed that the next 
step was to search the Auckland area for similar aerials, plot their 
positions on the map and then look again for correlations of data. 
In the interim I began to spread the word among some of my asso- 
ciates and fellow pilots that we were hunting for aerials, and asked 
them to keep an eye out. 
Over the next four months I spent my days off work cruising 
around the Auckland area looking for anything unusual in the way 
of masts and aerials. Results exceeded all expectations. A surpris- 
ingly large number of strange aerials turned up; plotted on the 
Auckland map, they showed quite clearly that they were more than 
ham listening-posts — although in every instance they were in fact 
listed as belonging to ham stations in the official ham radio year- 
book. It was clear that the specialised aerials were set up in straight 
lines in relationship to one another — and in addition were blended 
into the UFO grid pattern established over the Auckland area. 
At this point I was faced with the obvious conclusion that a group 
of electronics experts knew far more than I did about the grid 
system — and moreover, that the knowledge must have been in 
their possession for quite some years. Some of the aerials, we found, 
had been located on the present sites for periods ranging up to 
several years. 
51

[PAG 70]
When the implications of this dawned on me, the shock was 
severe: the grid was no longer just a theoretical possibility. It was 
a definite fact, and a fact that had been known to an indefinite but 
clearly large number of people for some considerable time. It looked 
to me as though electronic equipment was being built into the net- 
work, and as though they were carrying out or controlling large 
scale experiments. But to what purpose? And who were "they?" 
Both of these questions cannot yet be answered. However, we shall 
present some of our speculations and we hope that readers will 
come to light with further information that will help solve the mystery 
There was another method by which we could prove conclusively 
that the so-called ham radio stations were established on certain 
geometric positions for purposes other than for private experiment 
or simple communication. By a study of the geometric pattern that 
had emerged from a careful plotting of all the known aerial sites, it 
should be possible to predict where other odd aerials would show 
up. If the pattern was right, if our thinking was right, we should be 
able to extend the pattern, rather like the "series" type of problem 
sometimes presented in intelligence tests, and declare that therefore 
another aerial should be located here, there, or over there — or 
the map. 
If, on the other hand, the positions were entirely coincidentally 
linked with the grid; if in fact there was no connection at all; and 
if indeed the aerials were genuinely ham stations and scattered in 
a more or less random order over the countryside, such prediction 
would simply not be valid. 
One Friday night I spent a couple of hours studying the networl 
of aerials and calculated various co-ordinates from their positions 
When I had pinpointed what seemed to me to be a most likely 
position for an aerial as yet undiscovered by us, I called Peter and 
we arranged for a meeting the following afternoon. 
On an ordinary street map we pencilled in the position where 
expected an odd aerial should be located. Then with a camera 
handy, we went off on our hunt. 
This was to be the first big test. I was reasonably confident the 
we would find an aerial where I had plotted it on the map; but a 
the same time I was horribly aware that I could also be falling flat 
on my face. I had still been compelled to assume certain geometric 
relationships in connection with the system; whoever had planned 
the evident aerial network already knew for certain all the relation 
ships involved, while I had to fumble through a maze of calculation

[PAG 71]
to theorise about them.    I was not certain, also, how Peter was 
reacting to my theories. We hadn't long been working together at 
that stage, and up to now he had simply had to take my word for 
many aspects of my research.   But if the present excursion proved 
to be successful, the greatest gain for both of us could be a firming 
up of confidence. 
We approached the street I had circled on the street map, and 
turned the corner. 
And there it was. 
I was both relieved and excited. Peter seemed quietly surprised. 
The aerial before us, and which we photographed, was a two-way 
complex of directional components. Co-ordinates from several other 
aerial positions passed through this point from different directions. 
My plot had been accurate to within about a hundred feet or so 
which, considering the quality of the survey maps I use, was fairly 
close to precision. We found a place from which we could take 
photographs to add to our growing pile of pictorial evidence for the 
existence of an aerial network, and went home. 
There was still a slim possibility that the finding of an aerial 
almost exactly where I had predicted it to be could have been by 
chance alone; I knew that it was by no chance; but at the same time 
we recognised the fact that sceptics would make this claim. How- 
ever, a short time later, and on two different occasions, I was able 
to go through the identical performance for yet another two 
aerials — first, figuring on the map where they ought to be, in 
accordance with the emerging pattern and my theories on the fac- 
tors involved in locating the strange masts; and then with a street 
map and a car, actually locating them in precisely those positions. 
In all honesty I must also admit that on two occasions I drew a 
blank. One of these spots, where I was certain I would find a mast, 
is now being kept under observation by some of our helpers; I believe 
there is a strong possibility that eventually an aerial will appear on 
this location. One development, and one that we realised would 
come about, has been that the folk in charge of these aerials are 
aware of our activities and, probably knowing that we have the 
place under surveillance, they may be unwilling to construct a mast 
until it becomes imperative for the network as a whole to have 
one there. 
We have never been reluctant to let people know what we were 
up to in our searching, and in our conclusions. As soon as new 
evidence has come along we have passed it along the pipeline which 
53

[PAG 72]
54 
we believe is being tapped by "them." There is nothing secret, clas- 
sified or underhand about our investigation. The New Zealand 
Government has been kept up to date with my findings, both thor- 
ough correspondence and written reports direct to the Prime Min- 
ister. We have made a point of passing on each link in the chain 
of evidence to key personnel so that there can never be any sugges- 
tion made that our investigation is somehow or other "subversive". 
Our whole aim has been to bring facts to light so that from the 
sheer weight of the evidence someone in authority, somewhere, sooner 
or later, is going to have to admit to the public that not only do 
UFOs exist but that the grid system on which they operate is also 
an established fact. And until this happens, our work shall con- 
tinue. If it should happen that I am stopped, there are many others 
now with the knowledge that will enable them to continue the 
investigation, with or without official approval. The information we 
have patiently garnered over the course of several years has been 
spread out, and I have personally schooled others so that they can 
carry on if it becomes necessary. Several journalists, some of them 
correspondents for overseas organisations, are also kept informed of 
our progress, and it will now be impossible for the truth to be 
hidden for much longer. 
When the admission is finally made, when it is stated that marsh 
gas, the rise and fall of Venus and all the other rubbish trotted out 
by the tame and the not so tame scientists who seemingly have 
forgotten the first principles of science to "explain" UFO sightings, 
are not the be-all and end-all of UFO phenomena, then our inves- 
tigation will slow down.   Our aims will have been achieved. 
Our search for aerials has continued throughout the months, up 
to the present time, and still the odd mast is drawn to our attention. 
They can be seen throughout New Zealand, and we know they exist 
abroad as well from reports from as far afield as Australia, France 
and America. In this country we have uncovered them from Inver- 
cargill to the north of Auckland. 
Most numerous are those shaped like boxes. But others have 
slight variations. One variety is an elongated type that looks some- 
thing like the framework of a box-kite — presumably for more 
efficient directional purposes. Some have a highly polished metal 
sphere placed within the box shape. For some reason these spheres, 
which are quite large, give off flashes of light, observable from many 
miles away on a fine day. This type is easily seen from the air - 
from as far away as fifteen miles.   Whether the light is reflected

[PAG 73]
55 
from a prismatic surface or emitted from within the spheres them- 
selves is something we do not yet know. 
We do not know what this sphere is, or what it does.    One 
possible explanation was offered by a director of a scientific equip- 
ment manufacturing company in the United States: "The needie- 
like protruding elements on the ball are uni-directional vertical probes. 
In the ball a transducer, or transistor pre-amp director, directs any 
signal from above the main antenna down to the main antenna, and 
this is then relayed from one antenna tower to the next to a main 
base of receiver operations.  This, then, would prevent any acciden- 
tal reception of the signal from a UFO etc. from being picked up by 
any, just any, radio that happened to be tuned to the right frequency...I 
prefer to think that the little ball on top of the receiver receives at 
a much higher wavelength (frequency) and then the ball's transis- 
torised circuit, acting as a converter, reduces the received signal to 
a lower frequency, and it is then carried from one tower to the next 
until it reaches its home receiver station." 
Another hint of connection between the strange aerials and UFOs 
is the fact the grid aerial under the sea off the coast of South 
America, photographed in 1964 by the US survey ship Eltanin, has 
ball-shaped objects on the extremities of its antennae; moreover, 
antennae protruding from UFOs have been observed, also, to have 
ball-shaped ends. 
The other main type of aerial which appears to be built into the 
grid consists of a similar lattice steel mast with heavy-looking aerial 
elements supported horizontally across the top.   Some minor masts 
within 
the 
system 
are 
more 
like 
ordinary 
TV 
aerials. 
The pattern produced on a map by pinpointing the aerials is a 
complex one — especially when positioned on a map that also in- 
cludes the UFO grid.  After a close study of the network it becomes 
obvious that the man-made aerials have been built into the UFO 
grid for a definite purpose, and apparently with a full awareness of 
the existence of the UFO grid.  A number of areas in New Zealand 
where UFO activity has been pronounced are also areas in which 
the aerials occur. 
As our investigation went on, a mass of information was built up 
from the aerial network, and I have been able to check many of my 
own theories against it.  The discovery that "they" had placed their 
equipment in specific geometric positions gave me clues which have 
led me on to new discoveries.   "They" are now aware of this, and I 
imagine I am not too popular with "them" — first, for having stumbled

[PAG 74]
56 
on the aerial network, and then for not having the decency to keep 
quiet about it. 
The discovery of the aerials and our conclusions about their function, 
plus the new discoveries which we have derived from our under- 
standing of their positioning, have given rise to a cat-and-mouse 
affair which has sometimes been anything but a game. The follow- 
ing chapters will enlarge upon these matters in detail.

[PAG 75]
6>   SCIENTISTS AND THE UFOS 
57 
THE 
 
DISCOVERY 
OF 
A 
NETWORK 
OF 
MAN-MADE 
transmitting stations  around  our  city,  described  in  the 
preceeding 
chapter, 
was 
the 
most 
startling 
tangible 
fact 
that 
we had encountered in our UFO research.    We discovered that 
Auckland city and the surrounding areas were linked with the 
transmitters by numerous geometric alignments.   Further investi- 
gation suggests very strongly that the pattern is still incomplete — 
and that other stations are yet to be added to the system. 
Months passed before we were able to determine the positions of 
all the stations plotted on the survey maps and at that stage we 
considered that there was enough evidence to prove that secret 
experiments were being carried out. We decided also that it was 
now necessary to bring to public attention all the facts so far estab- 
lished, and to fill in further details of the aerial network patterns 
as each new additional aerial came to our notice. On the basis of 
the material in this chapter, some readers may wish to carry out 
investigations of their own into the aerial system. If so, we would 
certainly be interested in hearing about results. 
As each aerial was discovered, its precise position was plotted on 
the same grid map of Auckland and its surrounding districts which 
I had used when I established the positions of UFO activity, published 
in my first book.   The question was whether there was some cor- 
relation between the positions ofknownUFO activity and the location 
of the transmitting aerials. Remember, the UFO positions had been 
established several years before our investigations into the aerials. 
It was soon very clear indeed that there were connections be- 
tween the UFO positions and the more recently found aerial loca- 
tions. Straight lines drawn through different combinations of aerial 
positions produced definite geometric patterns which were clearly 
linked to the UFO positions. 
When these patterns were further analysed it appeared that where 
the building of a man-made station was not possible for topographic 
reasons, a UFO may have been brought in to place — or blast— an 
 aerial or similar device into position. One of these positions was, we 
believe, in the middle of a factory in Rosebank Road in the Auckland 
suburb of Avondale.