=== CATEGORIA: agricoltura | An_Agricultural_Testament_-_Albert_Howard.txt ===

INDICE CHUNKS:
  chunk_001: 43,278 chars — [PAG 1] OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS AMEN HOUSE, E.C. 4 London Edinburgh Glasgow  È New York Toronto Melbourne Capetown Bombay Calcotta Madras HUMPHREY. MILFORD PUBLISRER TO THE UNIVENSITY  [PAG 2] AN AGRI...
  chunk_002: 44,680 chars — [PAG 29] 14 . . INTRODUCTION milk.! Nevertheless, the waste products of the animal, as is often the case in other parts of the world, are not always fully utilized for the land. The Chinese have for a...
  chunk_003: 44,694 chars — Let us review briefly the operations of Western agriculture from the point of view of the utilization of wastes in order to discover whether the gap between the losses and gains of humus, now bridged ...
  chunk_004: 44,849 chars — FTER the first complete account of the Indore Process was A published i in 1931, the adoption: of the method at a number of centres followed very quickly. The first results were summarized in a lectur...
  chunk_005: 44,916 chars — The basis of research work on cotton in India was therefore disclosed by a study in the field of the crop itself. The problem was how best to maintain soil aeration and pércolation. This could be solv...
  chunk_006: 44,987 chars — The uses of green-manuring in agriculture can now be con- sidered. Generally speaking they fall into three classes: (1) the © safeguarding of nitrate accumulations; (2) the production of humus, and (3...
  chunk_007: 44,972 chars — A detailed examination of the gases ‘produced i in the tips showed _that in addition to nitrogen, carbon dioxide, ‘and oxygen, a con- siderable quantity of methane (16 per cent.) and smaller propor-  ...
  chunk_008: 44,556 chars — [PAG 157] 132 HEALTH, INDISPOSITION, AND DISEASE IN AGRICULTURE  of nitrate of soda. In the guava, however, combined nitrogen removes the harmful effect because the roots of this tree are able to obta...
  chunk_009: 44,915 chars — (c) The use of artificial manures, particularly sulphate of ammonia. The presence of additional combined nitrogen in an easily assimilable form stimulates the growth of fungi and other organisms which...
  chunk_010: 44,411 chars — ‘ direction and has permitted such a state of things to arise and to develop must itself be in need of overhaul. This task has been attempted; the existing structure of agricultural research has been ...
  chunk_011: 44,885 chars — How does this research organization strike the tillers of the soil” for wliose benefit it has been created? The farmers complain that - the research workers are out of touch with farming needs and’ co...
  chunk_012: 44,646 chars — How do the summer and autumn crops, often raised in this area under extensive methods, manage to obtain a supply of nitrate without any added manure, and how is it that the soil fertility of the Gange...
  chunk_013: 44,630 chars — -It has been claimed that it is cheaper to-make compost in heaps alongside the lands where the raw material is‘ grown. and to rely on the rains for the water. If the rains are regular this acts quite ...
  chunk_014: 19,253 chars — 7. È Indian Central Cotton ‘Committees 40, 165. ti Indian Tea Association, 57. indigo, 12. “Indore; method of keeping cattle at, 4 methods of controlling cattle disease at, 162. . lack of infectious.c...

TESTO COMPLETO CHUNK 1 (prime pagine):
[PAG 1]
OXFORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS
AMEN HOUSE, E.C. 4
London Edinburgh Glasgow

È New York Toronto
Melbourne Capetown Bombay
Calcotta Madras
HUMPHREY. MILFORD
PUBLISRER TO THE
UNIVENSITY

[PAG 2]
AN
AGRICULTURAL
TESTAMENT

BY

SIR ALBERT HOWARD, C.LE., M.A.

Formerly Director of the Institute of Plant Industry
Indore, and Agricultural Adviser to States
in Central India and Rajputona

HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON NEW YORK TORONTO

[PAG 3]
First Published . . . . . 1940
Second Impression. . . . -1942
Third Impression . . . .. 1943
Fourth Impression. . . . 1944
Fifth Impression +. . +. . 1945

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN

[PAG 4]
TO

GABRIELLE
WHO IS NO MORE

[PAG 6]
The Earth, that’s Nature’s Mother, is her tomb;
What is her burying grave, that is her womb.
° Romeo and Fulist.

And-Nature, the old nurse, took
The child upon her knee,

Saying: ‘Here is a story-book
Thy Father has written for thee.’

‘Come, wander with me,’ she said,
‘Into regions yet untrod ;
And read what is still unread
In the manuscripts of God.’
. LONGFELLOW
The Fiftieth Birthday of Agassiz.

[PAG 8]
PREFACE

re the Industrial Revolution the processes of growth have

been speeded up to produce the food and raw materials needed
by the population and the factory. Nothing effective has been done
to replace the loss of fertility involved in this vast increase in crop
and animal production. The consequences have been disastrous.
Agriculture has become unbalanced: the Jand is in revolt: diseases
of all kinds are on the increase: in many parts of the world Nature
is removing the worn-out soil by means of erosion.

The-purpose of this book is to draw attention to the destruction
of the earth’s capital—the soil; to indicate some of the consequences
of this; and to suggest methods by which the lost fertility can be
restored and maintained. This ambitious project is founded on
the work and experience of forty years, mainly devoted to agri-
cultural research in the West Indies, India, and Great Britain. It
is the continuation of an earlier bock—The Waste Products of
Agriculture, published in 1931—in which the Indore method for
maintaining soil fertility by the manufacture of humus from

. vegetable and animal wastes was described.
During the last nine years the Indore Process has been taken
- up at many centres all over the world. Much additional informa-
tion on the role of humus in agriculture bas been obtained. I have
also had the leisure to bring under review the existing systems of
farming as well as the organization and purpose of agricultural
research, Some attention has also been paid to the bio-dynamic
methods of agriculture in Holland and in Great Britain, but I
‘remain unconvinced that the disciples of Rudolph Steiner can offer
any real explanation of natural laws or have yet provided any
practical examples which demonstrate the value of their theories.

The general results of all this are set out in this my Agricultural
Testament. No attempt has been made to disguis